Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Research in International Business and Finance
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ribaf
State ownership and the cost of debt: Evidence from corporate
bond issuances in China
Yao Ge, Yangshu Liu*,1, Zheng Qiao*,2, Zhe Shen*
School of Management, Xiamen University, Siming South Road 422, Xiamen, 361005, PR China
A R T I C L E I N F O
JEL classification:
G12
G31
Keywords:
State ownership
Implicit guarantee
Bond issuance
A B S T R A C T
Corporate credit risk can be reduced through implicit government guarantees. State-owned en-
terprises (SOEs) in China provide a distinctive setting to investigate government roles in cor-
porate debt financing. We find that non-SOEs’ corporate bond issuance costs are significantly
higher than those of SOEs. We also observe relatively lower bond issuance costs for firms con-
trolled by the central government (CSOEs) than those controlled by local governments (LSOEs).
In addition, we demonstrate that compared with SOEs, non-SOEs’ financial constraints are mi-
tigated to a larger extent after the bond issuances. Overall, we show that state ownership plays an
important role in determining corporate bond issuance costs.
1. Introduction
According to Merton (1974), the corporate cost of debt is largely determined by a firm’s credit risk. There are extensive studies on
risk and bond pricing (Leland, 1994, 1998; Duffie and Lando, 2001; Collin-Dufresne et al., 2001; Longstaff et al., 2005; Huang and
Huang, 2012). Debt holders require risk premiums for different levels of credit risk. Among the various factors affecting credit risk,
government involvement, which can potentially provide implicit guarantees, significantly affects investors’ expectations of a firm’s
prospect and risk evaluation.3 Implicit guarantees by the government could convert to monetary benefit by affecting financing costs.
Starting in 2007, there had been no default case in firms with state ownership until April 21, 2015. The government always interferes
when holding firms are close to default, making the debt repayment seem compulsory. This phenomenon in China is usually called
“nonelastic payment” and is arranged by the government. As a result, investors in China have strong beliefs of implicit guarantees by
the government to bail out its connected firms, and corporate credit risk premiums are adjusted accordingly.
How exactly does the government affect the credit risk of a firm? The government discriminates its support to firms of different
political backgrounds. Obviously, SOEs in China are able to obtain more support from the government than non-SOEs, both explicitly
and implicitly. With respect to the cost of financing, the differentiation in support between them will lead to different levels of credit
risk and corporate bond issuing cost. According to the study by Li. et al. (2008), private entrepreneurs are subject not only to certain
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2019.101164
Received 13 August 2019; Received in revised form 2 December 2019; Accepted 18 December 2019
⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: yge57@outlook.com (Y. Ge), ysliu@xmu.edu.cn (Y. Liu), zqiao@xmu.edu.cn (Z. Qiao), z.shen@xmu.edu.cn (Z. Shen).
1 Liu acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (71401144).
2 Qiao acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (71802171). All errors are ours.
3 Faccio et al. (2006) find international evidence that politically connected firms are more likely to be bailed out by the governments. For example,
the bail-out of the Wall Street giants by the U.S. government led to extensive discussion on topics such as ‘too big to fail’ (Sorkin, 2009), which
significantly changes market risk perspectives when the government is involved. Merton and Tsesmelidakis, 2014 argue that the “too big to fail”
(TBTF) firms benefit by obtaining financing at lower costs, especially the indirect effect of government bailouts, which is incorporated into public
belief.
Research in International Business and Finance 52 (2020) 101164
Available online 02 January 2020
0275-5319/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

forms of social and political discrimination in the reform process but also to an unfavorable economic environment. In other words,
SOEs always obtain more favorable terms from the government than non-SOEs do. This discrimination may also hold for corporate
bonds; there are two ways for the government to alter a firm’s credit risk, ex-ante support and ex-post support, which are described in
detail in the next paragraph.
On the one hand, the government may provide ex-ante operational support to keep firms from facing financial difficulty. We call
this support “precautionary support.” One way of doing so is by providing direct economic support, such as placing more government
orders to boost a firm’s revenue, making favorable industrial policies to suppress its competitors, and providing financial subsidies
directly, such as tax deductions. Another form of support is by helping firms gain easier access to financing, such as bank loans,
especially when both the firm and the bank are SOEs at the same time in China (Claessens et al., 2008). In economic terms, firms such
as SOEs are subject to soft budget constraints, as described by Kornai et al. (2003). Borisava et al. (2015) also find that firms with
higher government ownership are able to obtain a lower cost of debt during a financial crisis or when they are facing higher
likelihood of financial distress.
On the other hand, the government could offer implicit guarantees to bail out the firm when the firm is already in distress. We call
this support “protection support.” The firm’s credit risk decreases when its recovery rate increases. As a result, corporate bond pricing
and yield-to-maturity are altered accordingly. For example, on March 7, 2014, the corporate bond issued by Shanghai Chaori Solar
Energy Science & Technology Co., Ltd. made default announcements on the coupon payment of its bond. Nevertheless, with the help
of the local government, the payments to investors were fulfilled 7 months later. In addition to this semi default event, in March 2015,
the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) required local governments to exclude corporate bonds with potential
default risk, which strengthened the expectation of the implicit guarantee from the government.
We find that the issuance cost of corporate bonds is significantly lower for SOEs than for non-SOEs. The main finding is most
concentrated in high-profitability firms. Furthermore, we find partial evidence that among the SOEs, those held by the central
government obtain relatively cheaper corporate bond financing than those held by local governments. To explore the financial
consequences of this bond pricing differentiation, we show that the cash holding and financial constraints are reduced to a larger
extent for non-SOEs; this demonstrates that the marginal contribution of the bond issuances in corporate financing is higher for non-
SOEs, which face more stringent financial constraints in China.
This paper adds to the literature on political connectedness. There have been extensive studies on firms’ political connections and
corporate decisions. Facio (2006) uses a unique personnel dataset to measure corporate political connectedness and finds that po-
litically connected firms receive preferential support from the government. One related paper by Fan et al. (2007) studies politically
connected firms and their post-IPO stock performance. They find that politically connected firms underperform in the long run after
stock issuances. Using data from Brazil, Claessens et al. (2008) find that firms making campaign contributions to elected politicians
obtain easier access to bank financing and demonstrate higher stock returns. Li et al. (2008) adopt a special measure of CEO identity:
whether he or she is a member of the China Communist Party. They find that those forms whose CEOs are affiliated with the Party
have better performance, especially in regions with weaker market institutions and legal systems. Chaney et al. (2011) argue that
politically connected firms are opaquer and have relatively poorer reported earnings quality. One related paper by Bliss and Gul
(2012) finds in Malaysia that politically connected firms maintain a lower cost of debt. Xu et al. (2015) demonstrate that in Chinese
family firms, politically connected founders are more likely to appoint a second-generation family member as its chair. They also
show that this arrangement helps improve firm performance, making political connection an important factor in corporate decisions.
Having SOEs as one of the dominant market participants is a unique phenomenon in China. Instead of using inference from
personal connections to measure political connections indirectly, explicit government ownership is a more direct form of political
connections. This clear setting provides us with a rare opportunity to study political influence in financing. Moreover, differentiation
between SOEs and non-SOEs is not subjective to data availability problems as small samples in personal connection samples. We take
the corporate bond universe as our target sample with a clear label of CSOE/LSOE/non-SOE.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional backgrounds of Chinese SOEs and
corporate bond market development. Section 3 depicts the data and methodology used in this paper. Section 4 presents a series of
empirical results of the analysis. Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Institutional background
As a transition economy from a previously plan-oriented system to a market-oriented one, China has a large proportion of firms
with clearly identifiable government ownership, i.e., state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The government acts as the controlling
shareholder for SOEs. Consequently, SOEs are closely tied to the government by nature. In the meantime, firms with private own-
ership, i.e., non-SOEs have prospered during the dramatic reform process since the early 1990s. The comparison between SOEs and
non-SOEs in the corporate bond market provides us with a clear setting to test how state ownership affects corporate financing.
Moreover, SOEs in China can be further divided into two types: those controlled by the central government (CSOEs) and those
controlled by local governments (LSOEs). Comparisons between the two types of SOEs are also conducted in this study.
There have been extensive studies on firm’s political connectedness and corporate financing. Most of them find that politically
connected firms gain favorable support, such as easier access to equity financing and bank loans. Borisova and Megginson (2011)
study how privatization affects the corporate cost of debt in European SOEs. Borisova et al. (2015) examine the relation between
government ownership and bond credit spread of the data of 43 countries. However, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
study how political connectedness affects corporate bond issuance specifically. Corporate bond issuance is an important financing
tool for public firms. Regarding issuance costs in the secondary market, focusing on corporate bond enables us to investigate the
Y. Ge, et al.
Research in International Business and Finance 52 (2020) 101164
2