World Development 179 (2024) 106608
Available online 29 March 2024
0305-750X/© 2024 The World Bank and Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Regular Research Article 
State-owned enterprises as countercyclical instruments: Quasi-experimental 
evidence from the infrastructure sector 
Matías Herrera Dappe a, Aldo Musacchio b,*, Burak Turkgulu a, Carolina Pan c, 
Jonathan Barboza d, Yadviga Semikolenova a 
a World Bank, United States 
b Brandeis University and NBER, United States 
c Power for All, United States 
d Mexico Economy Secretariat, Mexico 
A R T I C L E I N F O 
Keywords: 
State-owned enterprises 
Infrastructure 
Macroeconomic shock 
Fiscal transfers 
A B S T R A C T 
This paper examines the effects of a negative macroeconomic shock on the financial performance of state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs) in infrastructure. The main aim of the paper is to explore whether SOEs serve as counter­
cyclical instruments or whether they end up generating fiscal costs during a downturn, perhaps amplifying 
negative shocks. The paper introduces a new measure of fiscal injections that includes subsidies, equity r­
ecapitalizations, and loans from the government, other SOEs, or state-owned financial institutions. The empirical 
setup uses a quasi-experimental setting that exploits the differential effects of a drastic fall in oil prices (in 
2014–15) for SOEs in countries that experience a negative aggregate demand drop as a consequence of this shock 
versus similar firms in countries that do not suffer a downturn from the shock. The results—based on a balanced 
sample using coarsened exact matching and a differences-in-differences estimation—show that SOEs in treatment 
countries received increases in fiscal injections as a percent of average assets of 3.5 percent the year after the 
shock, equivalent to a significant recapitalization. These fiscal injections take the form of equity injections and 
loans from the government and state-owned financial enterprises. The results also show that capital expenditure 
as a percent of average assets in fully owned infrastructure SOEs decreased by 3.5 percentage points the year 
after the negative shock, equivalent to a 40 percent decline relative to its average level. In sum, this paper 
presents evidence that shows that SOEs do not serve as countercyclical tools and, in fact, may amplify negative 
shocks by requiring fiscal injections for SOEs while also lowering their capital expenditures. 
1. Introduction 
A key policy question is whether state-owned enterprises (SOEs) can 
play a countercyclical role during macroeconomic crises or whether they 
actually amplify shocks by creating fiscal risk and requiring significant 
funds for bailouts (Bova, Ruiz-Arranz, Toscani, & Ture, 2019). On the 
one hand, there is the view that SOEs are helpful countercyclical tools 
because they can reduce the pain of a negative shock by preserving 
employment (¨Ozkaya & Askari, 1999; Ramamurti, 1997), absorbing the 
cost of the shock by keeping employee salaries unchanged and not 
increasing the price of products or services, or by pursuing countercy­
clical policies, such as increasing capital expenditures during a down­
turn (World Bank, 2023; p. 76). For instance, recent studies use 
matching techniques to compare partially privatized SOEs (PPSOEs) and 
private firms in a variety of sectors, finding that during severe re­
cessions, the former have a slower rate of reduction in labor than similar 
comparable private firms (Lazzarini & Musacchio, 2018), a pattern that 
holds in public sector jobs in general (Kopelman & Rosen, 2016). There 
is also evidence that state-owned banks can expand lending during 
downturns (Coleman & Feler, 2015; Deng, Morck, Wu, & Yeung, 2015) 
and that SOEs in the oil industry can absorb large shocks in petroleum 
prices to prevent increases in gasoline prices to the public (Cheon, 
Lackner, & Urpelainen, 2015). 
On the other hand, SOEs can rely heavily on support from the gov­
ernment during negative shocks. In that case, rather than softening a 
negative shock, they can actually amplify it by generating fiscal risk. 
This is because SOEs use a variety of mechanisms to cope with negative 
shocks, including soft budget constraints (Kornai, Maskin, & Roland, 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: aldom@brandeis.edu (A. Musacchio). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
World Development 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/worlddev 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2024.106608 
Accepted 13 March 2024 

World Development 179 (2024) 106608
2
2003; Ter-Minassian, 2019). That is, SOEs may have access to subsidies 
and soft loans from other SOEs or the Treasury, which they use to 
withstand a shock. They can borrow at below-market rates from in­
vestors or from other SOEs or financial intermediaries, and they can 
receive operational subsidies, tax breaks, and other forms of support 
from the government, especially during downturns. 
Still, the fact that these two views coexist is to a large extent a 
consequence of two empirical challenges. The first one is that it is hard 
to have comprehensive measures of fiscal support for SOEs. For instance, 
Cheon, et al. (2015) show that in countries with an oil and gas SOE, 
when petroleum prices increase there is less passthrough to the price of 
gasoline consumers observe. Yet, they fail to track whether the SOEs that 
absorb the shock receive fiscal transfers or other forms of fiscal in­
jections, implying SOEs actually absorb negative shocks themselves. 
Alternatively, researchers can track the direct operation subsidies SOEs 
receive during a downturn (Reyes-Tagle, et al., 2022), but they may 
have a harder time tracking all the different loans SOEs can get from 
other state actors. Second, most of the discussions about the role of SOEs 
during crises lack experimental or quasi-experimental settings that can 
shed light on whether they indeed help to cushion economies from 
negative shocks using their own resources or whether they end up 
amplifying them by requiring fiscal resources to cope with the shock. 
This paper alleviates this empirical vacuum using a carefully hand- 
collected database of financial performance in infrastructure SOEs in 
19 countries from 2009 to 2018. This dataset, proprietary to the World 
Bank, provides us with enough cross-sectional and time-series variation 
to use an episode of a drastic unexpected negative shock as a quasi- 
experimental setting. Moreover, for this sample of firms the World 
Bank collected not standard financials but a detailed account of the 
different financing sources of SOEs, such as fiscal transfers, loans from 
other state-owned companies or banks, equity injections, etc. That is, for 
this sample we were able to develop a new, more comprehensive, 
measure of fiscal injections to support the operation of the firm that adds 
up operational subsidies, equity injections, new loans from other SOEs 
and new loans from state-owned banks net of increases in total 
assets—to avoid counting transfers to pay for asset acquisitions. This 
indicator of fiscal injections can therefore shed light on the full extent to 
which SOEs act as countercyclical policy tools buffering negative shocks 
with their own resources or whether they require significant fiscal in­
jections to cope with such shocks. 
In this study, we utilize the significant decline in oil prices in 2014 as 
the basis for our research design. Our primary aim is to construct a quasi- 
experimental framework, wherein SOEs in countries adversely affected 
by the oil price plunge (due to a fall in aggregate demand) serve as the 
treatment group. These are compared against analogous SOEs in control 
countries, where the same oil price decline left macroeconomic condi­
tions relatively unchanged. We posit that the 2014 oil price shock is an 
ideal case for our analysis due to its dual origins in both diminished 
demand and bolstered supply. This combination uniquely distinguishes 
it as a shock predominantly confined to the oil sector, rather than a 
broader global demand downturn (Kilian, 2009). Consequently, the 
decline in oil prices was not a result of a universal demand shock, which 
would have uniformly affected all countries. Furthermore, Baffes, Kose, 
Ohnsorge, and Stocker (2015; p. 4) attribute a significant role to OPEC’s 
decision to abandon price support and the rapid increase in oil pro­
duction from non-traditional sources in driving the price collapse post- 
mid-2014. That is, the price of oil did not decline due to a global de­
mand shock that could have made the negative macroeconomic shock 
common to all countries. 
In order to justify the use of this research design, we document that 
there were clear asymmetric macroeconomic effects in treatment 
countries, which had a negative macroeconomic shock, and control 
economies, which had relatively unchanged real GDP growth. In 
Table 2, we present evidence that shows that, in control countries there 
is a slight decline in GDP growth after the oil price drop, but that the 
decline is not statistically significant. In other words, in control 
countries conditions remained relatively unchanged. In contrast, Table 2 
shows that in treatment countries there is a steeper and highly statisti­
cally significant decline in GDP growth in the post-shock period. 
Now, rather than splitting countries along simple exporter/importer 
of oil lines, we split treated nations (experiencing a negative macro­
economic shock) and control countries (experiencing a non-negative 
shock) by devising a simple cutoff that avoids counting re-exporters of 
natural gas in Eastern Europe as control countries—given that they also 
suffer a negative shock in 2014. Thus, we classify countries whose oil 
and gas exports are above 0.5 percent of total exports and have reserves 
of 1 million or more barrels of oil or 700 billion cubic meters of gas as 
treated countries, including all other countries in the control group. We 
then study the effects of the negative oil price shock of 2014 on treated 
infrastructure SOEs relative to control SOEs (i.e., those in countries not 
affected by the oil price drop). 
We use detailed financial data of SOE performance and the fiscal 
injections they receive from the World Bank Infrastructure SOEs Dataset 
(a proprietary dataset), which tracks the financials of over 100 firms in 
19 countries from 2000 to 2018 and includes a more balanced panel for 
the period 2009 to 2018. We use data for the latter period for two sec­
tors—air transport, and power—to guarantee a consistent sample and to 
maximize intrasector variation over time and across countries. 
Ideally, we would like to isolate the negative macroeconomic effect 
of a drastic fall in the price of oil in treated countries from any con­
founding effect that may come from having firms enjoy cheaper fuel 
inputs. Finding a large sample of SOEs for which the latter effect is null 
or insignificant is difficult, however. For that reason, we isolate the 
positive effects stemming from the fall in the price of oil by comparing 
firms in treatment countries and control countries matched according to 
the ratio of fuel costs to total expenses in addition to sector, country 
income level and firm size (log of assets). That is, we compare firms with 
similar sensitivities to fuel costs and size within the same industry in 
treatment countries (i.e., with a negative macroeconomic shock) and 
control countries (i.e., with a non-negative macroeconomic shock) using 
coarsened exact matching (CEM) and a differences-in-differences esti­
mation. Using this research design and the CEM matching technique 
allows us to isolate the negative effect of the macroeconomic oil shock 
on treated SOEs as a negative shock to aggregate demand. 
Infrastructure is a good setting in which to study the effects of large 
macroeconomic shocks on SOEs for three reasons. First, as opposed to 
non-financial and non-infrastructure SOEs, in infrastructure SOEs, 
particularly in power and air transport, the government steps in to 
support them to ensure “basic” service of electricity and the “strategic” 
air connectivity service they provide are not interrupted during a crisis. 
Second, infrastructure SOEs are usually large, if not the largest, em­
ployers in the sectors and countries in which they operate. As such, their 
workers have significant political power, making it harder for managers 
and politicians to make painful adjustments to employment and ex­
penses when they face a negative shock. Third, infrastructure SOEs are 
usually strategic suppliers of inputs for companies and households, 
making them more prone to having controlled tariffs, which can exac­
erbate the effects of a negative shock (Galal & Shirley, 1995; Shirley, 
1999). Thus, infrastructure SOE are good tools to support the econo­
my—e.g., continuing with subsidized electricity and air transportation. 
Finally, the paper investigates whether these shocks have different 
effects on fully owned SOEs (FSOEs) and partially privatized SOEs 
(PPSOEs). PPSOEs refer to firms that are majority-owned or controlled 
but not fully owned by the state—we define full ownership when gov­
ernment has control of at least 99.5 percent of the share capital. This 
separation is important because PPSOEs tend to be more efficient and 
tend to rely less on government support for their day-to-day operations 
(Okten & Arin, 2006; Zhang, 2004). Still, we do not know the extent to 
which they also rely on fiscal injections to buffer negative shocks. 
Examining the heterogeneity of effects in FSOEs and PPSOEs is 
important because the partial privatization of infrastructure firms is 
usually accompanied by a full or partial liberalization of tariffs—by 
M. Herrera Dappe et al.