Finance Research Letters 60 (2024) 104856
Available online 13 December 2023
1544-6123/© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Governance of tax incentives: An effectiveness and differential 
analysis based on the Chinese context 
Zhixiong Huang , Lan Lv *, Ming Yang 
School of Accounting, Zhejiang University of Finance & Economics, Hangzhou, 310018, Zhejiang, China 
A R T I C L E I N F O 
KeyWords: 
Tax incentives 
Policy adjustment 
Governance 
Effect study 
A B S T R A C T 
The disordered and rampant local tax incentives have interfered with regular business competi­
tion and resource allocation. In China, the government has undertaken a new round of policy 
adjustment to comprehensively sort out and standardize tax incentives, trying to realign value- 
oriented tax competition among local governments. Thus, this paper examines the real effect of 
standardizing tax incentives using China’s State Council Documents No. 62[2014] and No. 25 
[2015], with the measurement of abnormal tax burdens and abnormal fiscal subsidies. The result 
shows that this round of policy governance has maintained the steadiness of the overall tax 
burden and fiscal subsidy, and only abnormal tax burdens and fiscal subsidies have been reduced 
through structural adjustment; In addition, it has also taken into account the difference among 
regional economic development. The governance in the Midwest is generally lighter than in the 
East. Meanwhile, the effect of governance among different property enterprises has presented a 
reduced tendency as "state-owned enterprises – local state-owned enterprises – private 
enterprises". 
1. Introduction 
There has been a proliferation of new tax incentives to boost economic development worldwide, yet over-reliance on tax incentives 
can be counterproductive. Some scholars have suggested that the incentive effect of tax incentives is limited, and its incremental value 
is even much lower than the negative impact on fair competition in the market (Kaplow, 2008). There is still debate over whether tax 
incentives should exist and whether the policy setting is justified. China is an example of a country where tax incentives are spreading 
uncontrollably. Although the government has heavily employed tax incentives since the Reform and Opening-up, which have been 
quite effective in attracting investment, creating jobs, and fostering regional economic growth and GDP, tax incentives are now a 
significant unfair factor impeding structural reform and the function of the market for resource allocation. To this end, the Third 
Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) put forward the reform orientation of reviewing 
and revising tax incentives. And at the end of 2014, the State Council issued Notice on sorting out and standardizing tax incentives. Any 
policies that break the law or impede fair competition must be included within the purview of governance, and all pertinent agencies 
must standardize the tax incentives offered by their respective departments in compliance with the unified requirements. Compared to 
earlier attempts, this round of governance of tax incentives is an improved countermeasure for the central government to cope with 
unconventional tax incentives and a crucial assurance for fostering fair competition among businesses. Therefore, it is feasible and 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: 1617634210@qq.com (L. Lv). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Finance Research Letters 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/frl 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2023.104856 
Received 27 October 2023; Received in revised form 24 November 2023; Accepted 12 December 2023 

Finance Research Letters 60 (2024) 104856
2
typical to study the effect of tax incentives governance in the Chinese context. 
At present, there are two main perspectives in the study of China’s tax incentives. One is to study the economic consequences and 
effects, including the development of high-tech industries (Li et al., 2016) and R&D investment (Dai and Liu, 2008). Another point of 
view is to analyze the internal logic of the existence of tax incentives. This is mainly from the legal level to regulate tax incentives and 
make reasonable arguments to define (Xiong, 2014; Xing, 2014), as well as focusing on the problems, top-level design, and specific 
path selection of governance of tax incentives (Cai, 2016; Yang, 2017). However, the above literature has not yet conducted an overall 
systematic examination of enterprise tax incentives at the micro level, resulting in a lack of theoretical and practical support for the 
governance of tax incentives in enterprises in different regions and with different property rights and tiers. 
Given this, this paper uses China’s State Council Documents No. 62[2014] and No. 25[2015] as an opportunity to examine the real 
effect of this round of governance of tax incentives by measuring abnormal tax burdens and abnormal fiscal subsidies. The result shows 
that this round of policy governance has maintained the steadiness of the overall tax burden and fiscal subsidy, and only abnormal tax 
burden and fiscal subsidy have been reduced through structural adjustment; In addition, in China, the governance of tax incentives in 
the Midwest is generally lighter than in the East which is more economically developed. Meanwhile, the difference in this round’s 
effect between regions predominantly targets tax burdens, with the irregular fiscal subsidy showing no discernible variation. This 
demonstrates that the impacts of tax incentives vary by region and that structural adjustments have considered variations in regional 
economic development. What’s more, the governance effect among different property enterprises has presented a reduced tendency as 
"state-owned enterprises – local state-owned enterprises – private enterprises". 
This paper may contribute to the following aspects: Firstly, taking China’s governance of tax incentives as the research perspective 
is typical, which can improve the literature on tax reform while allowing for a deeper understanding of the nature of tax incentives and 
their long-term effects. Secondly, using document No. 62[2014] as an opportunity, we examine the implementation effects and 
characteristics of China’s current round of tax-policy governance action to have a deeper comprehension of the local governments’ 
subjective willingness to sort out and regulate tax incentives. Thirdly, by measuring the amount of abnormal tax burdens and abnormal 
fiscal subsidies, the differences in tax incentives between different regions, enterprise property rights, and state-owned enterprise 
levels are tested, which offers relevant empirical proof and backing for the following step, which will improve the direction of market 
resource allocation and maintain the equity of tax burden across different regions. 
2. Literature review and research hypotheses 
2.1. Literature review 
For now, most of the research on tax incentives in the literature focuses on the economic consequences and effects, especially the 
development of high-tech industries and the exploration of the relationship between R&D investment. Among them, many studies 
show that tax incentives can significantly promote firms’ R&D investment (Shapiro, 2009), stimulate labor demand in the market 
(Eissa, 2004; Agarwal et al., 2007), attract firms to invest and open subsidiaries (Kaplow, 2008), and promote the development of new 
energy and other emerging industries (Dharmapala, 1999; Saez, 2004). However, some studies believe that the incentive effect of 
preferential tax policy is limited, and its incremental value is much lower than the negative impact on regular business competition 
(Kaplow, 2008). 
Another set of literature related to the theme of this paper is the characteristics and internal logic of tax incentives, as well as the 
top-level design and specific path selection of tax-policy governance. First of all, in order to study the logic and features of tax in­
centives, some researchers used nearly 100 texts about China’s tax incentives published before 2008 as their research object. They then 
discovered that the policies follow distinct phases (Huang et al., 2011). Gao and Mao (2013) further estimated the total size of China’s 
indirect preferential tax based on 5000 relevant data of random sampling taxpayers from the 2007 National Tax Survey and found that 
there is a significant trend of regional inequity in tax incentives. Secondly, the majority of the remaining literature examines legal and 
financial systems from a theoretical standpoint. For instance, Xing (2014) addressed the necessity for tax incentives from the 
perspective of tax competition reform for public welfare. Additional academics have explored ways to further reduce taxes and fees 
from the perspectives of statutory taxation, government functions, social security, and fiscal and taxation systems (Yang, 2017), and 
also proposed ways to improve tax incentives from the supply side, i.e., the aspects of the labor force, system creation, and innovation 
(Pang and Zhang, 2013; Cai, 2016; Liu et al., 2016). 
Reviewing the above two groups of literature, we find that there may be the following defects: First, there is minimal research on 
tax incentive itself, with most studies focusing on its economic implications and ramifications. Second, although many academics have 
advanced the theory of China’s supply-side reform, there has never been any actual testing of its effectiveness for the current round of 
tax-policy reform. Third, China’s tax incentives regime has distinct regional traits. Future tax incentive legislation will be heavily 
influenced by how well this round of the governance of tax incentives standardizes the market and accounts for regional variations. 
Due to the shortcomings of the existing literature, this paper attempts to measure the impact of the new round of tax-policy governance 
to further examine the mechanism of its role and better understand the local government’s subjective willingness to overhaul and the 
progress of implementation. 
2.2. Research hypotheses 
China’s current round of tax reform makes sense in light of its supply-side reform philosophy since it prioritizes stabilizing the tax 
burden before optimizing through structural adjustment. The so-called supply-side structural reform is to improve the quality of supply 
Z. Huang et al.