The Real Effects of Implicit Government Guarantee: Evidence
from Chinese State-Owned Enterprise Defaults
Shuang Jin,a Wei Wang,b Zilong Zhangc,*
aFinance, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong; bFinance, Smith School of Business,
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada; cSchool of Economics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
*Corresponding author
Contact: sjin@connect.ust.hk,
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0769-2778 (SJ); wwang@queensu.ca,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7462-951X
(WW); zilzhang@zju.edu.cn,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7788-5324 (ZZ)
Received: June 8, 2021
Revised: November 15, 2021
Accepted: January 10, 2022
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
July 20, 2022
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2022.4483
Copyright: © 2022 INFORMS
Abstract. We study the effects of implicit government guarantee (IGG) on Chinese state-
owned enterprises (SOEs). We ﬁnd that SOEs reduce their investments by 2.4% of book
assets, on average, relative to matched non-SOEs after the ﬁrst SOE default in China’s
onshore bond markets in 2015. The investment reduction concentrates among SOEs that
are ﬁnancially constrained, yet SOEs ﬁnanced by large state banks are hardly affected.
Bondholders require more stringent default protection in newly issued SOE bonds. We
also ﬁnd that the investment reduction is more pronounced for SOEs with severe agency
problems and that SOEs experienced more positive market reactions to acquisition
announcements after 2015. Our results suggest that the reduction in IGG has confounding
effects on Chinese ﬁrms. Although the weakening of IGG may help mitigate overinvest-
ment, it exacerbates ﬁnancial constraints of those with limited access to alternative sources
of ﬁnancing.
History: Accepted by Lucas Schmid, ﬁnance.
Funding: Z. Zhang acknowledges the funding support by Research Grants Council of Hong Kong
[Project 11503318].
Supplemental Material: The data ﬁles and online appendix are available at https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.
2022.4483.
Keywords:
implicit government guarantee • state-owned enterprises (SOEs) • investment • corporate bonds • default • ﬁnancial constraint
1. Introduction
Implicit government guarantee (IGG) arises from the
soft budget constraint phenomenon that originates
from socialist and mixed economies and is prevalent in
many economies around the world today (Kornai
1979, 1986; Berglof and Roland 1998; Kornai et al. 2003;
Faccio et al. 2006). State-owned enterprises (SOEs) and
systematically important ﬁrms are provided with IGG
for two primary reasons: political considerations, such
as the government’s goal to create jobs, support strate-
gic industries, or gain political support; and account-
ability problems—that is, the state, instead of SOEs,
is held accountable for failure and wrong decisions
regarding investment or production (Lin and Tan
1999).
Prior work suggests that the IGG provision is a
major source of economic inefﬁciency. Firms with IGG
obtain favorable rates of ﬁnancing given investors’
expectation of a government bailout in times of dis-
tress (Moody’s 2014, Borisova et al. 2015), which leads
to credit misallocation toward these ﬁrms (Song et al.
2011, Cong et al. 2019). More importantly, the IGG pro-
vision weakens the disciplinary effect of debt contracts
because of the unenforceability of bankruptcy threats,
creating moral hazard problems and jeopardizing in-
vestment efﬁciency (Jensen 1986, Maskin and Xu 2001).
Despite the appealing theoretical framework, empiri-
cal evidence on IGG’s effect on corporations in the real
sector is limited. Our paper intends to ﬁll this gap by
exploiting a series of Chinese SOE defaults in China’s
fast-developed onshore bond markets.
The SOE defaults in China serve as a unique setting
for our study for two reasons. First, Chinese SOEs
shoulder important political responsibilities and have
strong government protection for default (Zhu 2016).
A series of SOE defaults in the massively developed
Chinese domestic bond markets—now collectively the
second largest bond market in the world—surprised
the markets and generated exogenous variations in the
provision of IGG.1 Second, China’s unique legal insti-
tutions, economic reforms, and growing ﬁnancial mar-
kets provide a rare opportunity to explore the impact
of the political economy on corporate policies and the
compounding effects of IGG on ﬁrms.
Our empirical analysis starts with an event study
around the ﬁrst default of an SOE in China’s bond
3650
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 69, No. 6, June 2023, pp. 3650–3674
ISSN 0025-1909 (print), ISSN 1526-5501 (online)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/mnsc

market. On April 21, 2015, the Baoding Tianwei Group—
a large SOE owned by the central government—
surprised the markets by declaring default on one of its
bonds. The markets interpreted the event as the govern-
ment’s explicit reduction or removal of implicit guarantees
on SOEs as Chinese leaders began to implement reforms
to restructure troubled companies in the midst of an
unprecedented credit boom. Consequently, a series of
defaults by Chinese SOEs followed soon after the Tian-
wei default.
To show that the Tianwei default is informative to
investors on the Chinese government’s reform of IGG
policy, we examine the returns of 1,132 corporate
bonds and enterprise bonds of both SOEs and non-
SOEs that traded in the 61-day window around the
event date. We ﬁnd that, on average, the prices of SOE
bonds decline 1.48% more than those of non-SOE
bonds. The percentage of decline translates to a CNY
252 billion (approximately US $39 billion) reduction in
the market value of SOE bonds as of 2015. To the
extent that the Tianwei default is an informative event
of the Chinese government’s policy in weakening
IGG, it is not surprising that the prices of SOE bonds
decline, whereas the prices of non-SOE bonds barely
change around the Tianwei default event.
Our main empirical speciﬁcations exploit the Tian-
wei and subsequent SOE defaults in 2015 as an ex-
ogenous reduction of IGG on SOE bonds. Our study
sample comprises all private and public Chinese ﬁrms
(both SOEs and non-SOEs) that accessed China’s
domestic bond markets for ﬁnancing between 2012
and 2019. Our baseline analysis conducts difference-
in-differences (DID) tests on corporate investment
around the Tianwei default with ﬁrm-level controls,
industry and year interacted ﬁxed effects, and ﬁrm
ﬁxed effects. We perform propensity score matching
(PSM) to form treated and control groups for our anal-
ysis to account for observable differences between
SOEs and non-SOEs before the event. Our primary
hypothesis is that managers of SOEs are incentivized
to overinvest given the low ﬁnancing costs and the
lack of disciplinary effects of debt. A reduction in the
IGG provision helps mitigate the moral hazard prob-
lem and thus, leads to a reduction in investment.
Our baseline regressions show that SOEs reduce
their total investments—measured by the sum of capi-
tal expenditure, intangibles, and acquisitions—by 2.4%
of book assets annually compared with the matched
non-SOEs after the ﬁrst SOE default. The decline repre-
sents an approximately 22% reduction in total invest-
ment. The annual time series dynamics of investment
show that the largest decline in investment occurs
in the year immediately after the Tianwei default.
Importantly, we observe that SOEs and non-SOEs in-
vest similarly before the event. The evidence helps us
not only verify the parallel trend assumption of our
DID analysis but also, address the potential reverse
causality concern that changes in investments may
trigger a government policy to reduce IGG.
We conduct a number of robustness tests. First, to
address the concern that the Tianwei event may be cor-
related with the government’s agenda on “decapacity”
and “deleveraging,” we remove overcapacity indus-
tries in which SOEs have a predominant presence and
ﬁrms that have high leverage ratios. Second, we repeat
our analysis by removing local government ﬁnancing
vehicles (LGFVs) and all private companies to address
the concern that our results may be because of the
representation of LGFVs that are regarded to have
the strongest government backing in our sample.
Third, considering potential unobservable differences
between SOEs and propensity score-matched non-
SOEs, we compare the investment dynamics of bond
issuers and nonissuers within SOEs. Fourth, taking
advantage of a policy shock that weakens the IGG of
certain LGFV bonds, we conduct a within-LGFV DID
analysis and ﬁnd that LGFVs with a reduction in IGG
reduce their investments more than those not affected.
Finally, to rule out the possibility that our ﬁndings are
driven by spurious relationships, we conduct a pla-
cebo test in which treatment is assigned randomly and
ﬁnd no evidence of a similar reduction in investment
using the newly generated samples.
To further mitigate the concern that our results are
driven by concurrent economic or policy changes that
may affect SOEs differently than non-SOEs after 2015,
we adopt an alternative identiﬁcation strategy by
exploiting staggered local SOE defaults across provin-
ces and time. Different local governments may have
distinct tolerance levels for failure and different incen-
tives to back local SOEs, resulting in a more granular
variation of the IGG reduction across provinces. We
expect local SOEs’ investment to be most sensitive to
the ﬁrst local SOE default within their province.
Although the overall economic magnitude is smaller
than the baseline result, we ﬁnd that local SOEs located
in the province of the ﬁrst defaulted SOE experience a
larger investment decline than local SOEs in matched
neighboring provinces. Findings from this test provide
additional support to those in the baseline regressions.
The combined evidence of negative bond market
reactions and investment dynamics suggests that the
investment decline may be a direct result of an
increase in ﬁnancing cost and perhaps, more scrutiny
by bondholders after the weakening of IGG. To pro-
vide empirical support to this important credit chan-
nel, we examine SOEs’ ﬁnancing activities and bond
contracting terms. First, we ﬁnd that SOEs’ bond issu-
ance experiences a signiﬁcant decline, whereas loan
issuance does not change signiﬁcantly, and SOEs keep
a similar cash balance. In economic terms, SOE’s
bond issuance amount declines by 27% compared with
Jin, Wang, and Zhang: Real Effects of Implicit Government Guarantee
Management Science, 2023, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3650–3674, © 2022 INFORMS
3651