American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2023, 15(1): 174–195 
https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20200873
174
SOEs and Soft Incentive Constraints 
in State Bank Lending†
By Yiming Cao, Raymond Fisman, Hui Lin, and Yongxiang Wang*
We study how Chinese state bank managers’ lending incentives impact 
lending to ­state-owned enterprises (SOEs). We show lending quantity 
increases and quality decreases at month’s end, indicating monthly 
lending targets that decrease lending standards. Increased quantity 
comes from both SOEs and private lending, whereas decreased qual-
ity is from only SOEs, which continue to receive loans even after prior 
defaults (particularly at month’s end). We suggest that SOE lending 
may thus be beneficial for state bank managers, who lend to delinquent 
state enterprises to meet targets, which in turn may exacerbate SOEs’ 
soft budget constraints. (JEL G21, G28, L32, O16, P34).
­S
tate-owned enterprises in many economies are supported financially by govern-
ments. It may be hard for policymakers to force SOEs to adhere to a fixed bud-
get, leading to bailouts via government transfers or ­write-offs of bad debt owed to 
state banks—what Kornai (1979) famously referred to as the soft budget constraint. 
A large literature documents, both theoretically and empirically, the reasons that a 
government may wish to prop up SOEs as well as the social ­cost-benefit trade-offs 
from doing so.1 Less ­well studied are the motivations and incentives of organiza-
tions and agents—most notably state banks and the loan officers they employ—that 
provide the financial support that enables the soft budget constraint. That is, it is 
straightforward to see how easy access to capital benefits managers of ­badly run 
SOEs, but little work looks at why those running state banks willingly provide credit 
to these troubled firms.
Conventional wisdom is that state banks lend to SOEs because they are compelled 
to do so by the government, and loan officers happily oblige because the government 
takes eventual responsibility for any SOE defaults (see, for example, Lu, Thangavelu, 
and Hu 2005; Tian 2004; Lou 2000, among others). We show, however, that bank 
1 See, among many examples, Dewatripont and Maskin (1995); Maskin (1999); and Kornai, Maskin, and Roland 
(2003) for early theoretical contributions; Estrin et al. (2009) on government ownership and privatization in tran-
sition economies; Guriev (2018) for a recent discussion of soft budget constraints and the failure to privatize; and 
Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) on lending to insolvent firms in Japan, a market economy.
* Cao: Boston University (email: yiming@bu.edu); Fisman: Boston University and NBER (email: rfisman@
bu.edu); Lin: Nanjing University (email: linhui@nju.edu.cn); Wang: Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 
and Shanghai Jiao Tong University (email: benbenqingzi@hotmail.com). Dan Silverman was coeditor for this arti-
cle. Authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order. Wang would like to thank National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (grant 72172090) for financial support. We thank various seminar audiences for their 
suggestions and two anonymous reviewers for their very constructive feedback.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20200873 to visit the article page for additional materials and author 
disclosure statement(s) or to comment in the online discussion forum.

VOL. 15 NO. 1
175
CAO ET AL.: SOES AND SOFT INCENTIVE CONSTRAINTS IN STATE BANK LENDING
managers may have their own incentives to lend to SOEs, as such lending provides 
an easy way for them to meet lending targets that are also common in banking—
state or otherwise. That is, the opportunity to lend to SOEs provides bank managers 
facing loan targets with what we call a “soft incentive constraint” since it can easily 
be managed by lending to SOEs, with lesser concern for their creditworthiness.
We study the loan portfolio of a large Chinese state bank during the period 
1997–2010, with the ultimate goal of understanding what motivates their lending to 
SOEs versus private firms. Specifically, we examine how branch managers respond 
to month- and ­quarter-end loan quotas that Chinese banks (both ­state-owned and 
private) were reported to use to motivate them during the period we study.2
We begin by discussing and presenting evidence of lending targets for bank 
branch managers. We show that these incentives led to very strong monthly cycles 
in both the quantity and quality of lending in our data. Specifically, both the number 
and size of loans increase as the final day of the month approaches, consistent with 
branch managers’ need to hit ­month-end targets. Our intensive and extensive mar-
gin estimates combined imply an overall ­end-of-month lending increase of about 
92 percent. This pattern is distinct from any ­day-of-week or ­month-of-year effects 
and is invariant to a wide range of robustness tests, including branch ​×​ month fixed 
effects. Consistent with Oyer (1998), we also find a lower rate of lending at the 
beginning of each month, though the shortfall does not come close to offsetting the 
­end-of-period increase. Consistent with a ­month-end lowering of lending standards, 
we also show that a ­month-end loan is more than 1.1 percentage points (8 percent) 
more likely to be classified eventually as a bad loan. These findings echo those of 
Tzioumis and Gee (2013), which finds similar patterns for US mortgage lending for 
loan officers motivated by ­month-end targets.
We next turn to exploring the composition of lending over the monthly cycle, 
focusing on two main features of borrowing firms: SOE status and past borrowing 
history. We document several drivers of the overall monthly cycles in loan quan-
tity and quality that may be useful for understanding bank managers’ incentives to 
lend to SOEs. First, we find that, while the ­end-of-month increase in bank lending 
appears for both SOE and private borrowers, the quality decline is driven primarily 
by loans to SOEs. If banks were driven to lend to SOEs simply via government fiat, 
we would not expect to see this monthly cycle. Rather, SOEs would simply have 
higher default rates over the entire month, rather than a pronounced increase at 
month’s end when lending quotas become more of an immediate concern.
When we further disaggregate both SOEs and private firms into those with clean 
borrowing records versus those with past default, we see a much starker contrast: 
first, ­non-SOEs with past defaults receive almost no loans whatsoever from the bank, 
accounting for just 1.5 percent of overall lending on average. SOE borrowers with 
past defaults, by contrast, constitute 30 percent of the bank’s new lending during the 
period we study, and the monthly cycle of lending to SOEs is comparable for those 
2 Such incentives are pervasive in the banking industry. See Tzioumis and Gee (2013) for evidence on ­short-term 
lending quotas in US mortgage lending, also discussed further below.