291
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Public Management Research Association. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Article
Crowding-in or Crowding-out? How Subsidies 
Signal the Path to Financial Independence of 
Social Enterprises
Patrick Reichert,*,† Marek Hudon,* Ariane Szafarz,* 
Robert K. Christensen‡,
*Université Libre de Bruxelles; †elea Center for Social Innovation, IMD; ‡Brigham Young University
Address correspondence to the author at preicher@ulb.ac.be.
Abstract
In today’s multisector configurations, there is little clarity about whether and how public and 
private subsidies influence social enterprises’ pursuit of financial stability. We address the 
strategic role of donors in the social-business life cycle whereby social enterprise start-ups 
rely on subsidies, while mature social enterprises strive for independence from donors. To ad-
dress the “missing middle,” we develop a typology of subsidy instruments and an intermediary 
signaling model to clarify how subsidies shape the evolution of outcomes for social enter-
prises. We argue that source variation matters for certain instruments like corporate intangibles 
and governmentally subsidized credit guarantees, which trigger crowding-in effects and attract 
commercial partners, while preventing perverse crowding-out effects, such as soft budget con-
straints. To illustrate this commercialization story, we draw upon a microfinance case study, 
demonstrating how public and private donors can induce crowding-in and crowding-out ef-
fects. In short, our subsidy typology helps unpack the signals that public and private subsidies 
send to commercial funders of social enterprises and how they shape the path to future finan-
cial independence.
Introduction
Social enterprises are hybrid organizations that use 
public and private resources and commercial oper-
ations to address social and environmental issues 
(Santos, Pache, and Birkholz 2015). Social enter-
prises play an increasingly important role in contem-
porary public and nonprofit administration (Hayllar 
and Wettenhall 2013; Kerlin 2009; Salamon 2015; 
Tekula and Andersen 2019). As such, Choi, Berry, and 
Ghadimi (2020) recently invited “public administra-
tion and policy scholars … to accumulate both theor-
etical and practical knowledge on how governments 
shape social enterprises” (502). In engaging this invita-
tion our aim is to extend theoretical knowledge, illus-
trated with a practical case, Bancos Compartamos, to 
conceptually clarify how public and private subsidies 
shape the financial stability of social enterprises.
Like other entrepreneurial ventures, the acquisition 
of resources is a key challenge for social enterprises 
since they lack experience and proven competencies 
(Zott and Huy 2007). The double bottom line of social 
enterprises also makes them more opaque to outsiders 
than traditional start-ups, and thus more likely to 
We are grateful to Marc Jegers, Valentina Hartarska, Marc Labie, and 
Tyler Wry for their helpful comments and suggestions on this and 
earlier drafts of the article, as well as the participants of the 6th EMES 
Research Conference on Social Enterprise, 5th European Research 
Conference on Microfinance, 3rd VUB-ULB Doctoral Workshop, and 
15th Edition of the ULB-Sorbonne Research Day.
Perspectives on Public Management and Governance, 2021, 291–308
https://doi.org/10.1093/ppmgov/gvab014
Article
Advance Access publication July 27, 2021
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/ppmg/article/4/3/291/6328968 by New York University Libraries user on 14 August 2026

Perspectives on Public Management and Governance, 2021, Vol. 4, No. 3
292
resolve information asymmetries thorough soft infor-
mation to attract funding (Cornée 2019). Nevertheless, 
the pursuit of both financial and social value creation 
appeals to public and private donors who increasingly 
seek to leverage their limited resources and crowd-in 
commercial private investment to scale projects that 
serve the public good (Agranoff and McGuire 2001; Di 
Domenico, Haugh, and Tracey 2010; Smith, Cronley, 
and Barr 2012).
Scaling has long been recognized as a core con-
cept for social enterprises (Dees, Anderson, and Wei-
Skillern 2004; Schneider 2017). Scaling impact is 
key to evaluate the performance of social enterprises 
(Ebrahim and Rangan 2014; Molecke and Pinkse 
2017). To date, scholars have investigated the strategies 
and processes to scale impact (e.g., Dees, Anderson, and 
Wei-Skillern 2004; Dobson et  al. 2018; Hartley and 
Benington 2006; Ni and Zhan 2017), the drivers of 
scaling impact (e.g., Bacq and Eddleston 2018; Bloom 
and Chatterji 2009), and the ethical and organiza-
tional challenges of scaling impact (e.g., André and 
Pache 2016; Bradach 2003). However, the literature is 
relatively silent on scaling impact from a corporate fi-
nance perspective.
This gap is problematic since the promise of so-
cial entrepreneurship centers in the ability to achieve 
financial sustainability and operate independent of 
government and philanthropic support (Di Domenico, 
Haugh, and Tracey 2010). To date, commercial finance 
has been unable (or unwilling) to provide the quan-
tity of or, perhaps more importantly, the appropriate 
mix of resources to meet the demand of this growing 
sector (Lall, Chen, and Davidson 2019; Lall, Chen, 
and Roberts 2020). This paradigm leads to a business 
life cycle where social start-ups rely on public and pri-
vate donors, while mature social enterprises strive for 
independence from donors. This article addresses the 
“missing middle,” that is, the transitional path leading 
from subsidy-taking endeavors to commercial enter-
prises. We seek to understand how public and private 
subsidies frame the transition and help social enter-
prises scale up and attract sustainable commercial re-
sources for maximum social impact (Terjesen, Bosma, 
and Stam 2016). We argue that central transitional 
features are conditioned by subsidy features such as 
source-sensitivity and time-sensitivity.
To support our case, we have developed a con-
ceptual typology that identifies how some public 
and private subsidy instruments open access to com-
mercialization while others make it more difficult. 
Although the term commercialization often invokes 
negative connotations related to a nonprofit or public 
organization’s abandonment of its social mission to 
pursue earned revenue, we use the term commercial-
ization to refer to the sustainable integration into the 
mainstream business sector (Armendáriz and Morduch 
2010). The negative connotation of commercialization, 
also known as “mission drift,” can be viewed as a shift 
of hybrid organizations toward underweighting their 
social bottom line and typically targeting better-off 
clients (Mersland and Strøm 2010; Armendáriz and 
Szafarz 2011). Mission drift is often associated with 
changes in legal status, remuneration scheme, and gov-
ernance features (Ramus and Vaccaro 2017), stemming 
from a lower concern for altruism (Hudon, Labie, and 
Reichert 2020; Cozarenco and Szafarz 2020).
By contrast, this article focuses on financial inde-
pendence, a positive consequence of commercializa-
tion.1 We show how subsidy instruments shape the 
path to self-sustainability for social enterprises. Our 
typology introduces preferential debt and preferen-
tial equity alongside the more recognizable subsidy 
instruments of grants and procurement. Preferential 
debt refers to concessionality along any dimension of 
debt financing (i.e., interest rate, grace period, security 
feature). Similarly, preferential equity refers to conces-
sions on equity features (i.e., dividend cap, restricted 
voting rights, etc.).
To make the connection between subsidy instru-
ments and financial stability, we construct a concep-
tual framework combining signaling theory and habit 
formation theory.
To date, signaling theory has been underutilized in 
the public and nonprofit administration and policy lit-
eratures. Further, the signaling literature has prioritized 
the recipient as the focal organization (Connelly et al. 
2011; Lall and Park 2020; Vasudeva, Nachum, and 
Say 2018). By contrast, we develop an intermediary 
signaling model to examine the signals that public and 
private donors send to commercial investors through 
the design of subsidy instruments. In doing so, we aim 
to increase our understanding of the factors that con-
tribute to the achievement of public outcomes across 
different organizational contexts (Moulton 2009). As 
for habit formation theory, which has been developed 
by scholars in social psychology (Verplanken 2018) 
and applied in several field connected to managerial 
aspects such as client loyalty and information systems 
(Limayem, Hirt, and Cheung 2007; Liu-Thompkins 
and Tam 2013). We extent the scope of this fruitful 
conceptualization to subsidy-dependent managerial 
habits that can counteract the commercial mindset.
We argue that both public and private donors, al-
though they face different constraints in their provision 
of subsidy, can induce crowding-in and crowding-
out effects on commercial capital. We suggest that 
1 To some extent, mission drift and financial independence are opposite 
sides of the same coin since the consequences of the push by donors 
for social enterprises to become financially independent can trigger 
mission drift (Augsburg and Fouillet 2013).
Downloaded from academic.oup.com/ppmg/article/4/3/291/6328968 by New York University Libraries user on 14 August 2026