Vol.:(0123456789)
Public Choice (2021) 187:111–142
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-020-00834-1
1 3
New evidence on the soft budget constraint: Chinese 
environmental policy effectiveness in SOE‑dominated cities
Mathilde Maurel1,2   · Thomas Pernet2
Received: 2 February 2020 / Accepted: 15 July 2020 / Published online: 28 July 2020 
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
This paper analyzes the efficiency of a set of environmental measures introduced by Chi-
na’s 11th Five-Year Plan in 2006, using a rich and unique data set assembled from the 
Ministry of Environmental Protection and the State Environmental Protection Agency. By 
exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in regulatory stringency generated by the regu-
latory system across China’s provinces, we find evidence that pollution-intensive cities 
reduced their SO2 emissions substantially, whereas cities with a strong state-owned enter-
prise (SOE) presence did not. We interpret the results as pointing to evidence of Chinese 
SOEs’ ongoing soft budget constraints. The findings are robust to the inclusion of different 
fixed effects and other key determinants of pollution. Moreover, we investigate the main 
factors underlying regulatory non-compliance: the overlapping (or not) of “Two Control 
Zone” (Special Policy Zone, Coastal) cities wherein environmental (growth) policies are 
prioritized; the existence of turning points below (above) which growth and reductions in 
pollution substitute for (complement) each other; the size and extent of industrial concen-
tration, which determines the possibilities of firms negotiating with the local authorities; 
and finally, the regulation-induced adoption of cleaner technologies by polluting firms, 
which enhance productivity and lower SO2 emissions.
Keywords  Environmental regulation · China · Kornai · Soft budget constraint · Difference-
in-difference estimation
JEL Classification  Q53 · Q56 · P2 · R11
1  Introduction
China illustrates the dilemma many nations face between the objectives of economic devel-
opment and poverty reduction, on the one hand, and of reducing pollution on the other. 
Environmental protection often is at odds with poverty reduction, as the steps required to 
reduce poverty may entail costs in terms of pollution to build infrastructure and stimulate 
 * Mathilde Maurel 
 
maurelm@univ‑paris1.fr
1 
CNRS, Paris, France
2 
Centre d’Economie de la Sorbonne, Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, Paris, France

112
 
Public Choice (2021) 187:111–142
1 3
growth. That trade off holds even more so in the case of China, with provinces at very dif-
ferent stages of economic development, as emphasized in Kahn and Zheng (2016, pp. 196 
and 198), as follows: “My boss [the provincial governor] … knows it is hard to kill two 
birds [economic growth and a clean environment] with one stone in my city for now”, or 
provinces adopting the strategy of “ridding the cage of old birds [polluting firms] in favor 
of new ones [clean and highly skilled firms]”.
Those metaphors evoke the two objectives the central government has pursued since 
2000, obeying a model of federalism that is unique, characterized by its dualism (Vahabi 
1995), by a specific trade-off between political cost and economic benefit and, finally, by 
the still ongoing planning of the economy and concomitant liberalization of market forces 
(Berglof and Roland 1998; Qian and Roland 1998). As a pure product of those charac-
teristics, the 10th Five-Year Plan (FYP), starting in 2001, set environmental objectives at 
the national level, while the subsequent 11th plan (2006–2010) moved the incentives for 
protecting the environment to the local level. The emphasis was switched from growth to 
pollution, implying that in the evaluation of the performance of local officers, the GDP 
growth rate, fiscal income, industrial value added, exports and foreign direct investment 
(FDI) were no longer binding targets carrying veto power (yipiao foujue). Conversely, 
environmental and energy consumption targets became targets of supreme value, which 
every mayor had to fulfill; otherwise, the mayor could not pass end-year evaluations.
Has the new model delivered its expected outcomes? The present paper provides 
an answer to that question. It stresses the efficacy of state regulation by highlighting the 
strength of Chinese cities’ policy-induced responses. Moreover, it shows that, while cit-
ies with smaller shares of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have been more sensitive to the 
new environmental targets and have reduced their emissions of pollutants significantly, cit-
ies dominated by SOEs have not taken similar steps. Their inaction in that regard can be 
viewed as an effect of the “soft budget constraint” (SBC) (Kornai et al. 2003). It is a term 
initially coined by Kornai (1993, 1995, 1998, 2001), who referred to the phenomenon of 
bailing out loss-making firms,1 consequently undermining ex ante incentives.
The SBC concept sees a straightforward application to the objective of sustainable 
growth: under rational expectations of being bailed out, public (SOE) or private organi-
zations will not be motivated to reach the objective of reducing pollution. What external 
circumstances, beyond the SBC, mattered for the realization of such environmental objec-
tives in China? Evidence that the cadre rotation system, which transfers officials to new 
positions every 3–4 years, may be the reason why short-term gains, including the extrac-
tion of rents from local polluting firms, could be prioritized over long-term ones. Stud-
ies have shown that cities with more educated mayors reach the environmental Kuznets 
curve turning point at lower levels of per capita income (Zheng et al. 2014). Last but not 
least, holding higher positions than local officials, senior managers of state-owned firms 
perceived themselves as being above the local law. As a result, some cities are populated by 
SOEs that violate environmental regulations, while at the same time generating jobs that 
are essential to evaluations of local mayoral performance.
This paper revisits the issue of the cities’ behavior and the ways they react to environ-
mental regulations. We start the analysis by presenting the main characteristics of Chi-
nese environmental policy before 2006 and until 2010, with special emphasis on two key 
components of that policy. First, we identify the cities targeted by the central government, 
1  The role of Chinese banks in rescuing SOEs and dampening the transition towards a green growth pattern 
has been documented in Maurel et al. (2019).