Journal of Corporate Finance 67 (2021) 101919
Available online 27 February 2021
0929-1199/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Varieties in state capitalism and corporate innovation: Evidence 
from an emerging economy 
Yongjia Lin (Rebecca)a, Xiaoqing Fu (Maggie)b,*, Xiaolan Fu c 
a School of Business, Macau University of Science and Technology, Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, Macao, China 
b Faculty of Business Administration, University of Macau, Avenida da Universidade, Taipa, Macao, China 
c Department of International Development, University of Oxford, 3 Mansfield Road, Oxford, UK 
A R T I C L E I N F O 
JEL code: 
D73 
G32 
G34 
M14 
O31 
O38 
Keywords: 
Innovation 
State capitalism 
ESG 
Economic policy uncertainty 
Corruption 
Ultimate controlling ownership 
A B S T R A C T 
This paper contributes to the literature by examining the impact of different forms of state 
ownership on corporate innovation and the moderating effects of environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) practices, economic policy uncertainty (EPU), and corruption in this own­
ership–innovation nexus. Building on both agency theory and institutional theory, we identify 
and divide the ultimate controlling shareholders into three types: central government, local 
government, and private shareholders. This study draws on data from 2629 listed firms in China 
between 2007 and 2015. Our results suggest that state-owned enterprises (SOEs) controlled by 
the central government show the strongest innovation performance in all scenarios. In addition, 
private firms outperform local SOEs in terms of patent quantity in both manufacturing and 
nonmanufacturing sectors and in high-economic-development regions, whereas local SOEs 
outperform their private peers with respect to patent quality, mainly in the manufacturing sector 
and high-economic-development regions. Such an ownership–innovation nexus is then found to 
be more pronounced for firms engaging in more ESG practices, during periods of higher EPU, and 
when less corruption is present. These findings demonstrate the value of diversity in state capi­
talism in guiding SOEs’ heterogeneous innovation activities in emerging economies. 
1. Introduction 
State governments in emerging economies have undertaken a series of reforms to restructure their state-owned enterprises (SOEs) 
in an attempt to improve firm competencies, including those in innovation (Stiglitz and Lin, 2013; Liang et al., 2015; Musacchio et al., 
2015; Genin et al., 2020). These reforms have primarily led to state capitalism, a regime characterized by the co-existence of hierarchy- 
based and market-based institutions, with the state strongly influencing firms (Bruton et al., 2015; Musacchio et al., 2015; Hu et al., 
2019; Mariotti and Marzano, 2019; Genin et al., 2020). Whereas an increasing number of studies has investigated how these reforms 
affect firm innovation performance in emerging economies (Ayyagari et al., 2012; Fang et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; 
Jia et al., 2019; Cao et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2020, among others), relatively less attention has been paid to how the underlying modes of 
control over SOEs imposed by different state government levels have shaped SOEs’ motivations, resources, and capabilities for 
innovation through reforms that ultimately affect their innovation performance. 
Varieties in state capitalism have important implications for corporate innovation in emerging economies because SOEs may follow 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: maggiefu@um.edu.mo (X. Fu). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Corporate Finance 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcorpfin 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2021.101919 
Received 16 March 2020; Received in revised form 16 February 2021; Accepted 19 February 2021 

Journal of Corporate Finance 67 (2021) 101919
2
different development pathways as a result of heterogeneous reform treatments. Specifically, different reform measures can be 
implemented at different government levels, generating organizational heterogeneity in terms of resources, logic, and behavior be­
tween SOEs controlled by central and local governments (Li et al., 2014). According to institutional theory (Scott, 2004), such 
institutionally derived organizational differences can motivate central and local SOEs to adopt varying innovation strategies, resulting 
in different innovation performance and providing the basis for our main research questions. What implications do the emergence of 
varieties in state capitalism hold for SOEs’ innovation performance? What are the underlying mechanisms through which the varieties 
in state capitalism affect corporate innovation? 
As the largest emerging economy globally, China provides a valuable platform for investigating these critical issues. Recognizing 
that innovation is a major driver of sustainable economic growth, the Chinese government has made the development of indigenous 
innovation the top priority in its national development plan since 2006. A series of new policies have then been implemented for this 
purpose (Fu, 2015). As a result, China’s average annual real growth in research and development (R&D) spending approached 20% 
during the past decade, making it the world’s second largest R&D performer (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop­
ment, 2020). Meanwhile, China has witnessed substantial growth in patent applications and has become the largest originator of 
patent applications globally (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2019). 
On the other hand, as indicated by Xu (2011), China’s institutional system is a regionally decentralized authoritarian regime that 
features a combination of political centralization and economic regional decentralization. In this regime, the central government 
maintains substantial control over political and personnel governance structures, whereas local officials have overall responsibility and 
various resources for running the economy within their jurisdictions. Consequently, SOEs controlled by the central government 
(hereafter referred to as “central SOEs”) have become national policy instruments for sustainable macro-level growth and social 
welfare maximization. SOEs controlled by local governments (hereafter referred to as “local SOEs”) are relatively more market-driven 
and equipped with strong commercial logic to pursue development goals set by local governments (Li et al., 2014). Given that 
indigenous innovation is a national strategy put forward by the Chinese central government, central SOEs may innovate to fulfill this 
national policy objective. However, local SOEs may innovate to primarily satisfy local fiscal needs. Their diverging motives, together 
with heterogeneous resources and institutional logic, may result in different innovation performance. 
In addition, as emphasized in Poon (2009), the Chinese government has promulgated its national policy to foster “national 
champions” and indigenous core technologies since the late 1990s. Central SOEs, acting as the “national champions,” are clustered into 
sectors of “strategic importance,” such as mining, energy, transportation, telecommunications, banking, and public utilities. Various 
measures have been adopted by the central government to nurture these “national champions.” Through the steady provision of 
natural resources, raw materials, technologies, and experts, these central SOEs have become vehicles accumulating independent 
productive and technological capabilities. The ultimate goal of this “national champions” strategy is to catch up to the global tech­
nological frontier and lay the foundations for future sustainable growth. As a result, China now has the largest number (124) of Fortune 
Global 500 companies globally, the majority of which are central SOEs. Among the top ten, for example, three companies are Chinese 
central SOEs, including Sinopec Group (#2), State Grid (#3), and China National Petroleum (#4).1 Therefore, China’s experiences 
with innovation and diversity in state capitalism have become the subject of widespread interest among various stakeholders in 
economics and politics. 
An increasing number of studies considered the impact of state ownership on corporate innovation performance in China but 
yielded mixed results (Jefferson et al., 2003; Li and Xia, 2008; Xu and Zhang, 2008; Guan et al., 2009; Dong and Gou, 2010; Choi et al., 
2011; Jiang et al., 2013; Fang et al., 2017; Xu and Yano, 2017; Yi et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019; Kroll and 
Kou, 2019; Cao et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020; Genin et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). In addition, 
none of the extant research has investigated the ownership–innovation nexus from the perspective of diversity in state capitalism.2 This 
study uses a large sample of listed firms in China for the 2007–2015 period in an attempt to fill the void by examining the impact of 
different forms of state ownership on corporate innovation and the underlying mechanisms through which the varieties in state 
capitalism affect corporate innovation. 
Inspired by the advocacy of Judge (2010) on developing a theory of corporate governance that is accurate for the economy, we 
identify ultimate controlling shareholders in China, divide them into three types—central government, local government, and private 
shareholders—and examine whether their impacts on firm innovation performance differ.3 Meanwhile, to obtain a more compre­
hensive picture of corporate innovation, we consider two dimensions of innovation performance, including the number of patents 
granted to a company as a measure of patent quantity and the number of citations received by the patents granted to a company as a 
measure of patent quality (Tan et al., 2020). In addition, we estimate the moderating effects of environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG) practices, economic policy uncertainty (EPU), and corruption in this ownership–innovation nexus. Finally, we split our sample 
into four paired subsamples representing manufacturing versus nonmanufacturing firms and firms in high- versus low-economic- 
development regions with an attempt to explore whether there are any heterogeneous industry and/or regional effects in this own­
ership–innovation nexus. 
1 Retrieved January 13, 2021, from https://fortune.com/global500/. 
2 Focusing on investigating the innovative efficiency of SOEs in China, Cao et al. (2020) argue that minority SOEs are more innovatively efficient 
than non-SOEs and majority SOEs, supporting partial state ownership. They also find that central SOEs are more innovatively efficient than local 
SOEs in the further tests presented in the online appendix. Innovation efficiency is defined as patent output per dollar of R&D spending. 
3 Because the number of firms with foreign ultimate controlling ownership is very small (223 of the 15,436 in our sample), we do not divide 
private ownership into domestic private ownership and foreign ownership. 
Y. Lin et al.