International Review of Economics and Finance 85 (2023) 1–20
Available online 28 December 2022
1059-0560/© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Review of Economics and Finance
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/iref
SOEs reform and capital efficiency in China: A structural analysis✩
Le Tang
Department of Economics, Suffolk University, Boston, MA, 02108, United States of America
A R T I C L E
I N F O
JEL classification:
D24
O10
P31
Keywords:
Capital adjustment cost
SOEs reform
China
A B S T R A C T
This paper investigates the effect of state-owned enterprises reform, a policy phrased as
‘‘grasping the large, letting the small go’’, on firms’ capital efficiency in Chinese industries from
1998–2007. First, we present several stylized facts on investment rates in state and private
firms. Second, a dynamic programming problem is proposed and key structural parameters are
recovered through simulated moment matching method, so the estimated dynamic model is
able to replicate the stylized facts that are directly observable from the firm-level data. Our
quantitative analysis shows that the conversion of state firms into private ones reduces capital
adjustment costs. Particularly, state firms’ quadratic adjustment cost declines significantly
almost by half, and the fixed cost decreases slightly. These findings are robust in various
specifications. Hence, the reform in state firms leads to increased capital efficiency. Last, the
counterfactual analysis suggests that state and private firm’s output would increase about 9.60%
and 1.87% if the capital adjustment costs in state firms were lowered to the same levels in
private firms.
1. Introduction
One distinctive feature of Chinese economy is the existence of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Over the past decades, reforms
in SOEs has drawn close attention to the public and policy makers. The share of state-owned firms’ industrial output declined from
59% in 1998 to 38% in 2007, and continue to fall to about 25% in 2018 (China Statistical Yearbook 2019). Starting in late 1990s,
China’s leadership initiated a series reforms in SOEs. One policy is phrased as ‘‘grasping the large, letting the small go’’, meaning
that large state firms are corporatized and merged into larger state-owned conglomerates, and small state-owned firms were to be
privatized, closed or sold. According to Gan et al. (2008), between 1995 and 2005, nearly 1 000,000 firms with 11.4 trillion RMB
worth of assets were privatized. Together these comprised two-thirds of China’s SOEs and state assets, ‘‘making China’s privatization
by far the largest in human history’’ (Gan et al., 2008).
The privatization or conversion of state firms may have raised their productivity because such firms may have a closer alignment
of control rights, clarified system of incentives and rewards for mangers and workers, and better corporate governance. Lots of
research has provided empirical evidence that conversion of state firms increases firm’s efficiency and productivity, using reduced-
form regression analysis. In this paper, we employ a structural approach to investigate the impact of SOEs reform and construct
several counterfactuals, which are not available using regression techniques. Our analysis also sheds some light on through what
channels the converted state firms achieve efficiency.
In this paper, we evaluates the effect of SOEs reforms in terms of capital adjustment cost, which is closely related to capital
efficiency. Using the Chinese manufacturing firms data from 1998–2007, we first summarize salient features (such as distribution
✩I would like to thank the two anonymous referees for their constructive suggestions. The financial support from the Rosenberg Institute for Asian Studies
at Suffolk University, United States of America is gratefully acknowledged.
E-mail address:
ltang7@suffolk.edu.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iref.2022.12.005
Received 30 March 2021; Received in revised form 7 July 2022; Accepted 4 December 2022

International Review of Economics and Finance 85 (2023) 1–20
2
L. Tang
and second moments) in investment for state and private firms. Then a dynamic optimization problem that characterizes firm’s
investment decision and transitions of firm’s ownership types is proposed, and key structural parameters are recovered so the
dynamic model is able to reproduce the salient features directly observable from the firm-level data. Our structural estimations
show that the privatization of state firms increases firm’s capital efficiency, by lowering their capital adjustment costs. In particular,
when a state firm is privatized, the quadratic or convex adjustment cost declines significantly, with slightly decrease in fixed cost.
The prominent reduction in quadratic cost indicates that the converted state firms become more flexible in adjusting their capital
stock, or more quickly respond to changes in external market conditions. This could be a reflection of increased organizational
efficiency, streamlined decision-making process and improved corporate government within firms. Last, based on the structural
estimations, we find that state and private firms’ output would increase by 9.60% and 1.87% if the capital adjustment costs in state
firms are lowered to the same levels in private firms, as Chinese government determines to push reforms in state sector.
This paper contributes to three strands of literature. First, our research contributes to the literature on SOEs reform and conversion
of state firms in China by employing a structural approach. Using the firm-level data, Jefferson and Su (2006) find that the conversion
of SOEs contribute to overall increases in current productivity and innovation effort. Bai et al. (2009) present evidence that the
privatization of SOEs leads to increasing sales and higher labor productivity. Jefferson et al. (2008)’s analysis shows that the SOEs
reform yields productivity gains during 1998 to 2005 for both state and private firms. Brandt et al. (2012) conclude that over
1998–2007 approximately one-half of total TFP growth resulting from the restructuring and exit-entry dynamics of China’s
manufacturing sector, both SOEs and non-SOEs. Hsieh and Song (2015) find that the surge in SOE-firm productivity resulting in
significant part due to the fact that the existing firms were typically smaller, exhibiting lower productivity than surviving SOEs.
The existing literature relies heavily on the reduced-form regression analysis. The deep structural parameters, such as parameters
in capital adjustment costs that dictate firms’ behavior, cannot be obtained in regressions. Because the adjustment costs are usually
implicit opportunity cost, not directly observable from firm-level data. Instead, we recover the parameters in adjustment costs using
simulated moment matching (SMM). The key structural parameters are recovered so the model is able to reproduce the salient
features directly observable from the firm-level data. Following the structural approach in Asker et al. (2014) and Bloom (2009),
this research provides further evidence that state firms exhibit higher capital adjustment costs, in comparison to private counterparts,
and the most distinctive difference lies in the quadratic adjustment cost.
Second, this paper also complements the literature on the structural estimation of capital adjustment costs in Chinese indus-
tries. David and Venkateswaran (2019) and Wu (2015) provide structural estimates of capital adjustment cost in Chinese industrial
firms, the authors pooled all industrial firms together, and do not focus on the distinctions between state and private firms. Cooper,
Gong et al. (2015) and Tang (2021)’s work provide estimates of capital adjustment costs in state and private firms, however the
authors estimate the adjustment costs for state and private firms separately. A key difference from the existing studies is that we
estimate the state and private firms’ adjustment costs simultaneously from a dynamic model. Cooper, Gong et al. (2015) and Tang
(2021) estimate state and private firms’ adjustment costs separately because they do not take into account the transition of firms’
ownership types, thus their results are potentially biased. In our paper, the transition of firm’s ownership is embedded in the dynamic
model, so we are able to estimate the structural parameters in state and private firms’ adjustment costs simultaneously. This approach
circumvents the potential biasedness originated from separate estimations.
Third, our research is closely related to the analysis on capital and investment efficiency in state and private firms. Lots of
literature document the empirical evidence to support that state firms tend to be less efficient in investment comparing to private
firms, based on regression analysis (see the survey by Megginson, 2017). The explanations range from organizational efficiency (Lin
& Germain, 2003), internal governance structure (Shen et al., 2020), allocating investment across different business unit (Ljungqvist
et al., 2015), etc. Our structural estimations corroborate previous reduced-form regression analysis (see Brandt et al., 2012; Cevik,
2020 and Hsieh & Song, 2015 and Ljungqvist et al., 2015 among many). Further, we are able to construct counterfactuals and
conduct several policy experiments. We find that reducing quadratic adjustment cost in capital is the most effective way to improve
state firm’s output, investment and employment. Moreover, if Chinese authority is determined to push the reform in SOEs, the
adjustment costs in state firm would be lower to the ones in private firms, then the outputs in state and private firms are expected
to increase by 9.60% and 1.87%, respectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the stylized facts on investment rates in state and private
firms. A dynamic optimization problem is laid out in Section 3. Section 4 presents the estimates of key structural parameters
recovered through simulated moment matching method, along with several policy experiments. Robustness check of our estimates
is reported in Section 5. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
2. Stylized facts
This section first describes the institutional background on the SOEs reform that began in the late 1990s. Then it introduces the
data set used in this analysis. It further uses the data to create certain “stylized facts”, such as moments and correlations, which are
then used for structural estimation in Section 4.
2.1. Institutional background
The Chinese economy was centrally planned prior to 1978. That year, China’s leader Deng Xiaoping introduced a series of reforms
that gradually opened the economy, implemented market-oriented policies, and allowed non-state ownership to exist and develop. In
the early 1980s, an enterprise responsibility system was implemented. After fulfilling state plans and output quota, state enterprises