Journal of Humanities, Arts and Social Science, 2024, 8(2), 345-349 
https://www. hillpublisher. com/journals/jhass/ 
ISSN Online: 2576-0548 
ISSN Print: 2576-0556 
 
DOI: 10.26855/jhass.2024.02.009 
345 
Journal of Humanities, Arts and Social Science 
 
Analysis and Discussion of the Problems in the 
Process of State-owned Enterprise Reform 
Zhilian Wu 
School of Economics and Resource Management, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. 
 
How to cite this paper: Zhilian Wu. (2024)
Analysis and Discussion of the Problems in 
the Process of State-owned Enterprise Re-
form. Journal of Humanities, Arts and So-
cial Science, 8(2), 345-349. 
DOI: 10.26855/jhass.2024.02.009 
Received: January 30, 2024 
Accepted: February 28, 2024 
Published: March 27, 2024 
*Corresponding author: Zhilian Wu,
School 
of 
Economics 
and 
Resource 
Management, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China. 
Abstract 
The reform of state-owned enterprises is an important aspect and a central focus of 
the socialist market economy reform. State-owned enterprises are categorized into 
monopolistic and competitive entities. Some state-owned enterprises with natural 
monopolies require a high level of government supervision and policy support, 
while other state-owned enterprises with low industrial concentration need to relax 
control to enable them to actively engage in market competition. At present, China's 
state-owned enterprise reform has entered the fifth stage of mixed ownership re-
form. With the intervention of non-state capital and the marketization of state-
owned enterprises, the economic performance of state-owned enterprises has also 
improved, enabling them to better fulfill their social responsibilities. However, at 
both theoretical and practical levels, the reform of state-owned enterprises still en-
counters numerous challenges. These include policy burdens and insider control, 
employee incentives and innovation development, management buy-outs, and the 
loss of state-owned assets. This paper argues that state-owned enterprises still need 
to deepen market-oriented reforms, especially focusing on internal incentives and 
innovative development issues, in order to continuously enhance the operational 
efficiency of enterprises. 
Keywords 
State-owned enterprise reform, policy burden, employee incentive, management 
buy-out 
 
Since the reform and ‘opening up’, with the steady progress of China's economic system reform, the reform of state-
owned enterprises has become the central link of the economic reform and transition led by the government. To delegate 
benefits and expand enterprise autonomy as a starting point, the reform of state-owned enterprises has experienced the 
decentralization, power separation, modernization, shareholding system, and mixed ownership reform stage, the imple-
mentation of the modern enterprise system reform in 1993 (laid-off tide), strategic restructuring, state-owned assets 
supervision and a series of reform measures, gradually refined reform goal, strengthen the reforming power, achieved 
certain results (Yudong Qi et al., 2019). The central corporate social responsibility blue book, according to 2009 top 
100 enterprise social responsibility development index below 30 points, and in 2020, the number, rose to 58.9 points, 
shows that in the reform process of Chinese enterprises in responsibility management, market responsibility, social 
responsibility, environmental responsibility in areas such as performance is more and more bright eye. According to the 
State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council, in 2011, 69.38% out of the top 
500 companies in China were state-owned, accounting for more than half. In 2020, out of the top 500 Chinese enterprises, 
only 48 were state-owned, indicating a decline in state-owned enterprises. This trend shows that the state-owned econ-
omy is gradually making room for the private economy. Nevertheless, the reform of state-owned enterprises still faces 
many problems, which still have room for discussion in theory and practice. At the present stage, China's state-owned 
enterprise reform is in the stage of mixed ownership reform. For this reform, on the one hand, scholars represented by 

Zhilian Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.26855/jhass.2024.02.009 
346 
Journal of Humanities, Arts and Social Science 
 
Wu and Zhang believe that property rights reform is the core of state-owned enterprise reform, while scholars repre-
sented by Justin Yifu Lin believe that the most important thing of state-owned enterprise reform is to remove the policy 
burden (Zhang Hui et al., 2016). Through the summary of the previous literature and the verification of the actual situ-
ation, the author concluded that the reform of state-owned enterprises. 
1. Policy burden and insider control problems are superimposed 
State-owned enterprises due to their state-owned nature must face budget soft constraints, the problem's most funda-
mental reason is the burden of strategic policy and social policy, the former requires the government to focus on devel-
oping capital-intensive or technology-intensive strategic enterprises, while the latter requires state-owned enterprises to 
undertake employment and improve social welfare social functions (Lin, 2004). To some extent, some state-owned 
enterprises cannot effectively participate in the market competition. Therefore, SOE reform needs to weaken the impact 
of the policy burden on SOE. But in essence, the property rights arrangement itself principal-agency mechanism makes 
the enterprise, managers have a moral hazard problem: in the case of two rights separation, the interests of the owners 
and operator are usually inconsistent, and the information asymmetry and incentive incompatibility problem, this leads 
to the business operators for personal gain in the possibility of policy burden. This problem further led to the emergence 
of insider control, including the phenomenon of "revolving door", senior executive adjustment, pan-administration (Qi 
Yudong et al., 2019), and internal friction caused by the power struggle of internal personnel (Zhang Weiying, 2000). 
In fact, state-owned enterprises are not simply economic organizations, but also political organizations, undertaking 
political functions is an important function of state-owned enterprises, such as the decisive role in the basic industries 
that regulate the national economy and people's livelihood, mainly includes the network industries (including power, 
telecommunications, aviation, railway, natural gas and water industries). 
2. Employee incentive and innovation development face obstacles 
Centralization cannot provide incentives (Qian Yingyi, 1999), while lack of incentives causes innovation. The most 
important purpose of the reform of state-owned enterprises is to stimulate them to participate in the market economy 
competition and achieve innovation-driven development while improving employees and social welfare. Liu Ye et al. 
(2016) pointed out by analyzing the data of Chinese industrial enterprises that the mixed ownership reform of state-
owned enterprises in competitive industries can significantly improve the efficiency and total factor productivity (TFP) 
of state-owned enterprises, and intellectual property protection can also have an extremely positive impact. Pan et al. 
(2022) conducted a long-run empirical testing, which demonstrates that the privatization of China's state-owned enter-
prises has a significant positive impact on enterprise innovation by reducing agency costs. However, the reform is still 
facing such as central-local disharmony, and there are "hidden rules" in the organization. On the one hand, the wine 
table culture of state-owned enterprises is still prevalent, and the grass-roots workers are exhausted in all kinds of social 
parties and wine tables, while the main responsible work content is not substantially expanded and improved. On the 
other hand, the management is solidified, and a considerable number of managers occupy the management positions for 
a long time, and the dead positions are vegetarian. However, grassroots employees lack promotion channels for a long 
time, restrain their work enthusiasm, and form a negative situation of connection between the upper and lower levels. 
This is not good for enterprises to improve business performance, complete specific assessment indicators, and realize 
the value appreciation of state-owned enterprises, and will also inhibit the innovation of enterprises. In 2021, the resig-
nation of SMIC Liang Mengsong attracted attention. In this case, the contradiction between technology-based state-
owned enterprises for research and development personnel and managers is worth pondering. How to introduce, make 
good use of, and retain talents in state-owned enterprises may be another level of innovation and development. 
3. Management buy-out (MBO) leads to the loss of state assets 
The new regulatory system for the reform of state-owned enterprises is mainly based on capital management, and a 
three-tier regulatory framework has been established from the SASAC to the state-owned capital investment and oper-
ation companies to the state-owned enterprises (Liao Hongwei et al., 2018). Although facing the opportunistic risk of 
regulators, the three-tier structure (Figure 1) has also effectively reduced the intervention of state-owned assets regula-
tors in the operation of state-owned enterprises, weakened bounded rationality, and reduced transaction costs. But at the 
same time, due to the limitations of state-owned shareholders in some competitive areas, in the process of adjusting the 
layout of the state-owned economy, China's state-owned enterprise reform introduced the management buyout (MBO).