O R I G I N A L M A N U S C R I P T
State ownership reinvented? Explaining performance
differences between state‐owned and private firms
Sergio G. Lazzarini1
| Aldo Musacchio2
1Insper Institute of Education and Research,
R. Quatá, 300, São Paulo, SP 04546‐042,
Brazil
2Brandeis International Business School, 415
South Street, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
Correspondence
Aldo Musacchio, Brandeis International
Business School, 415 South Street, Waltham,
MA 02453, USA.
Email: aldom@brandeis.edu
Funding information
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cien-
tífico e Tecnológico; Harvard Business School;
Insper Institute of Education and Research
Abstract
Manuscript Type:
Empirical
Research Question/Issue:
This study aims to understand the implications of the
corporate governance arrangements in state‐owned enterprises (SOEs) that are
publicly listed in terms of firm performance relative to that of private firms.
Research Findings/Insights:
Using a new database of 477 large, listed SOEs
observed between 1997 and 2012 in 66 developed and emerging countries, we use
matching techniques to show that these firms do not underperform similar private
firms, except when the former face shocks that prioritize their social and political
objectives, such as during severe recessions. These findings demonstrate the need
to revise existing theories of SOE underperformance.
Theoretical/Academic Implications:
We expand the traditional agency view of
SOEs by introducing principal–principal conflicts that prevail in publicly traded firms.
We argue that governments try to steer SOEs to pursue social and political objectives,
which can lead to inefficiencies, but they also provide them rents and protection,
factors that should lead them to perform as well or better than similar private firms.
Thus, our theory of state ownership argues that their advantage or disadvantage over
similar private firms cannot be identified from the theory and thus needs an empirical
test.
Practitioner/Policy Implications:
We modify the simplistic view that SOEs are inef-
ficient and highlight that SOEs that compete with private firms may have advantages
that give them a competitive edge. This has implications not only for firm‐level
strategy, but also for competition policy worldwide.
KEYWORDS
Corporate Governance, National Privatization, National‐Level Governance Outcomes, Ownership
Mechanisms, State‐Owned Enterprise (SOE)
1
|
INTRODUCTION
In the last three decades, an impressive body of scholarly work has
studied the comparative performance of state‐owned and private
firms. The conclusion from this literature is that state‐owned enter-
prises (SOEs) are, on average, less efficient and profitable than
privately‐owned firms due to several factors. Based on agency logic,
scholars have pointed out that managers of SOEs are poorly
monitored and lack the high‐powered incentives normally found in
private firms (Dharwadkar, George, & Brandes, 2000; La Porta &
Lopez‐de‐Silanes, 1999). Depending on the strategic objectives of
the government, SOEs may also pursue objectives other than
efficiency and profitability (Bai & Xu, 2005; García‐Canal & Guillén,
2008; Shirley & Nellis, 1991; Stan, Peng, & Bruton, 2014). For
Received: 19 October 2017
Revised: 2 March 2018
Accepted: 4 March 2018
DOI: 10.1111/corg.12239
Corp Govern Int Rev. 2018;26:255–272.
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/corg
255

instance, governments may require SOEs to avoid layoffs during eco-
nomic crises or to divert their resources to support pet projects that
directly benefit their constituencies (Shleifer & Vishny, 1998; Vickers
& Yarrow, 1988). Consistent with these predictions, empirical work
has detected performance gains in the transition from state to private
ownership (for a review, see Megginson, 2005).
Given these potential liabilities of state ownership, it is surprising
that in more recent years we still see a pervasive presence of SOEs
throughout the world and in a broad range of industries (Bruton, Peng,
Ahlstrom, Stan, & Xu, 2015; Wooldridge, 2012). In 2013, among the
top‐100 Fortune Global 500 companies, 25 were state‐owned multina-
tional firms, directly owned by the state or indirectly through several
state‐related investment vehicles (Musacchio & Lazzarini, 2014). And
this phenomenon is not simply due to the rise of interventionist
emerging economies such as China or Russia; there is vast evidence
that SOEs remain important even in developed countries. A recent
survey of OECD countries, for instance, found that SOEs represented
a total equity value of US$1.4 trillion in 2011, of which 61% involved
firms with minority stakes—that is, firms with private management and
partial state ownership (Christiansen, 2011). Guedhami (2012) docu-
ments how governments increased their investments in firms through
acquisitions to record levels during the Financial Crisis of 2008–2009.
In addition, there is also evidence that investors have not shied away
from SOEs. A report by Morgan Stanley in May 2012 claimed that sev-
eral SOEs have outperformed their industry peers in emerging mar-
kets, despite the fact that they may be “targeting development
objectives rather than shareholder returns” (Morgan Stanley, 2012:
1). All in all, these facts raise an important question: given their fla-
grant resilience as top global corporations and potential investment
targets, is it possible that the intrinsic sources of performance disad-
vantage of SOEs have disappeared? If this is the case, which condi-
tions should improve the comparative performance of SOEs?
To shed light on these questions, in this paper we examine firm‐
level performance differences between SOEs and private firms based
on a cross‐industry, cross‐country sample of 477 large, listed SOEs
observed between 1997 and 2012 in 66 developed and emerging
countries. These are all publicly traded SOEs that are not only owned
by governments but also by private investors and funds. Of those firms,
280 have minority state ownership—a form of governmental participa-
tion that has been relatively understudied. For instance, in our database
we have large, global SOEs such as Norway's Telenor (majority),
Russia's Rosneft (majority), France's Renault (minority) and Brazil's Vale
(minority). These SOEs are compared to a group of 431 listed private
firms with no state ownership. We adopt a host of matching techniques
(Imbens, 2004) to guarantee comparability between the observed SOEs
and similar private firms based on key observable traits at the firm,
industry, and country level. In some specifications, we also run differ-
ences‐in‐differences estimations to remove the effect of unobserv-
ables (Heckman, Ichimura, & Todd, 1997), as well as dynamic panel
regressions to control for adjustment processes (Arellano & Bover,
1995; Blundell & Bond, 1998). Given our interest in studying SOEs as
vehicles for investment in equity markets, we focus on two key
profitability indicators: ROA and Tobin's q, which have also been widely
used in previous research examining sources of firm‐level performance
heterogeneity (e.g. McGahan, 1999; Villalonga, 2004).
We contribute to the literature on performance differences
between SOEs and private firms by arguing that these differences
increase subject to environmental factors that expose their inherent
constraints to adjust and optimize. The literature on privatization has
actually found that some of the differences in performance between
pre‐ and post‐privatization performance depended on a variety of
conditions such as residual state ownership, the prevailing institutional
and macroeconomic environments at the time of privatization,
whether foreign investors were involved and how much corporate
restructuring there was (Boubakri, Cosset, & Guedhami, 2005). More-
over, there is a literature that finds that post‐privatization residual
ownership affects corporate governance (Borisova, Brockman, Salas,
& Zagorchev, 2012; Guedhami, Pittman, & Saffar, 2009), the cost of
capital (Borisova & Megginson, 2011), valuation (Boubakri, El Ghoul,
Guedhami, & Megginson, 2018), and innovation (Cao, Cumming, Zhou,
& Zhou, 2016; Lazzarini, Mesquita, Monteiro, & Musacchio, 2016;
Zhou, Gao, & Zhao, 2017). Beuselinck, Cao, Deloof, and Xia (2017)
explore the impact that the Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 had on
the valuation and stock returns of European SOEs relative to similar
private firms. They find that SOEs experienced a less severe fall in
stock prices and market‐to‐book value than private firms, but only in
countries with strong investor protections.
In contrast to the existing literature, in this paper we examine the
performance gaps between SOEs and private firms in a large sample of
global firms from 70 countries. We propose and find that performance
gaps between SOEs and private firms are stronger during times of eco-
nomic recession across the board. For instance, while private firms can
downsize and adjust during severe economic downturns, governments
may require SOEs to avoid layoffs and invest in unprofitable projects
as a way to attenuate the political cost of those shocks (Musacchio
& Lazzarini, 2014; Shirley & Nellis, 1991). We also propose that these
increased gaps should be less likely observed in minority‐owned SOEs,
which tend to be less directly influenced by their home governments,
and that their magnitude should be critically influenced by local insti-
tutions. Namely, building on Henisz (2000, 2002), we hypothesize
and find that when governments are more constrained in their ability
to intervene and change policies, SOEs appear to behave more like pri-
vate firms in the way they respond to negative shocks.
Our findings improve our understanding of the firm‐level implica-
tions of state capitalism, a topic that has been relatively understudied
in strategic management (Bruton et al., 2015; Cuervo‐Cazurra, Inkpen,
Musacchio, & Ramaswamy, 2014; Wood & Wright, 2015). We submit
that performance differences between SOEs and private firms are not
static but greatly vary depending on contingencies affecting the likeli-
hood of government intervention. In other words, our study shows
that the key question is not whether SOEs underperform private firms,
but when and where. Thus, instead of looking for generic differences
between SOEs and private firms, scholars should pay more attention
to changes that increase the temptation of governments to intervene,
as well as local institutional constraints on their ability to influence
SOEs. This findings are consistent with those of the recent literature
looking at valuation and stock returns in SOEs in Asia and Europe dur-
ing the financial crisis in that minority SOEs seem to fare better than
private firms during times of crisis, especially in countries with institu-
tions that prevent government intervention in SOEs (Beuselinck et al.,
256
LAZZARINI AND MUSACCHIO
 14678683, 2018, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/corg.12239 by NYU Medical Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License