O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
Unification of power and responsibilities for state-owned
enterprises: A quasi-natural experiment
Ning Hu1
|
Shilei Yu1
|
Yanan Cao2
|
Savannah (Yuanyuan) Guo3
|
Yu Wang4
1Southwestern University of Finance and
Economics, Chengdu, China
2Shanghai University of International Business
and Economics, Shanghai, China
3University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada, USA
4Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Correspondence
Yanan Cao, Shanghai University of
International Business and Economics,
Shanghai, China.
Email: sufecyn@126.com
Funding information
National Natural Science Foundation of China,
Grant/Award Numbers: 72002173,
72010107001, 72102139; Finance
Department of Sichuan Province, Grant/Award
Number: 2021-sckjkt-026; Shanghai Municipal
Education Commission, Grant/Award Number:
21CGA65
Abstract
Research Question/Issue: Based on Property Rights Theory and Empowerment The-
ory, this paper uses the establishment of local State-Owned Assets Supervision and
Administration Commissions (SASACs) as a quasi-natural experiment to investigate
whether and how SASACs improve the efficiency of state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Research Findings/Insights: (1) After the establishment of SASACs, and compared to
those not supervised by the SASACs (i.e., the control group), SOEs governed by local
SASACs (i.e., the treatment group) have experienced a significant increase in decen-
tralization and empowerment from the government, proxied by corporate pyramid
levels. We also find increased pay-performance sensitivity for SOE managers and
higher productivity measured by total factor productivity (TFP). (2) SASACs adopt dif-
ferent strategies to manage SOEs in monopolistic and competitive industries. (3) The
above effect of the SASACs is more pronounced in SOEs supervised by high-quality
governments that effectively protect property rights, enforce fair contracts, apply
laws and regulations to everyone, and sufficiently refrain from expropriation.
Theoretical/Academic Implications: Using a quasi-natural experiment, this paper
expands the existing literature on SOE reform from the perspective of incentive
reform at the regulatory level based on Property Rights Theory and Empowerment
Theory.
Practitioner/Policy Implications: (1) Privatization is not necessarily the only optimal
solution for SOE reform. We show that the unification of power and responsibilities
can be very effective and is perhaps less costly and more practical than privatization.
Thus, our study provides an encouraging solution for SOE reform for other countries.
(2) Countries experiencing SOE reform should also work on strengthening their gov-
ernment quality in order to fully maximize the benefit of the reform.
K E Y W O R D S
corporate governance, Empowerment Theory, establishment of SASACs, flexible supervising
methods, Property Rights Theory, total factor productivity
1
|
INTRODUCTION
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) are a common form of business enti-
ties worldwide and across industries, accounting for 25 out of the top
100
Global
Fortune
companies
(Du
et
al.,
2018;
Musacchio
et al., 2014). Despite their undeniable importance to the world's econ-
omy, SOEs are often perceived as less efficient than other entities,
and SOE managers tend to be undermotivated to improve perfor-
mance. Research finds that problems, such as ownership vacancy
(Bradshaw et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2020; Wei, 2021), a lack of
Received: 27 February 2022
Revised: 3 November 2022
Accepted: 27 December 2022
DOI: 10.1111/corg.12514
Corp Govern Int Rev. 2023;31:971–993.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/corg
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
971

delegation of power and responsibilities (Chen et al., 2011; Du
et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2013; Xu, 2011), and “soft budget constraint”
(see Lin & Li, 2008, among others), result in various moral hazards and
agency problems in SOEs. How to improve SOE efficiency has thus
become a crucial question for researchers and practitioners in many
economies.
As the country with the largest scale of SOEs—one third in the
number of firms and two thirds in market capitalization (Jiang &
Kim, 2020)—China has introduced a series of measures since the
1970s to improve SOE productivity. Most noticeable was the estab-
lishment of the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration
Commission (SASAC) under the State Council (i.e., the central SASAC).
The SASAC consolidated various industry-specific ministries and
became the direct supervisor and manager of state-owned assets.1
After the central SASAC was established in March 2003, provincial-
and municipal-level SASACs (i.e., local SASACs) started to develop as
well. The formation of the SASACs arguably alleviated the free-rider
problems that plagued SOEs when multiple administrative institutions
shared the power and responsibilities of supervising SOEs, blaming
each other for poor performance while SOEs went unregulated. We
use the creation of the SASACs as a quasi-natural experiment and
empirically investigate whether and how SASACs improve the effi-
ciency of SOEs.
We hypothesize that the establishment of the SASACs introduces
a series of positive effects on SOEs. Our theoretical development is
fostered on the foundation of Property Rights Theory and Empower-
ment Theory. The Property Rights Theory contends that clearly
defined ownership is the premise of realizing efficiency (Coase, 1960),
which suggests that the creation of the SASACs as the sole responsi-
ble governmental division for managing and supervising state-owned
assets lays the groundwork for improving the operating efficiency of
SOEs. The Empowerment Theory emphasizes the importance of dele-
gating decision-making power to lower level managers with local
information and specialized knowledge to improve firm performance
(Hayek, 1945; Jensen & Meckling, 1992). This theory suggests that
the SASACs are more likely to decentralize and delegate responsibili-
ties to SOE managers, compared to the period when multiple govern-
mental divisions jointly managed SOEs. In addition, following prior
studies that find performance-based payment is often used in combi-
nation with the delegation of decision rights (Baiman & Rajan, 1995;
Bushman et al., 2000; Jensen & Meckling, 1992; Melumad &
Reichelstein, 1987), we predict that pay-performance sensitivity will
increase following the establishment of the SASACs to prevent SOE
managers from abusing their private information. Lastly, SOE man-
agers are no longer required to fulfill their social roles to serve the
public after SASACs were created. We expect SOE productivity to sig-
nificantly improve due to a combination of enhanced delegation to
the local level, increased pay-performance sensitivity, and a more
focused role for SOE managers.
We use the establishment of the local SASACs as a quasi-natural
experiment and construct staggered difference-in-differences (DID)
models to empirically investigate the economic consequences of the
creation of the SASACs. As predicted, we find that, after the
establishment of the SASACs, and compared to those not supervised
by the SASACs (i.e., the control group), SOEs governed by local
SASACs (i.e., the treatment group) experience a significant increase in
decentralization and empowerment from the government, proxied by
corporate pyramid levels. We also find increased pay-performance
sensitivity for SOE managers and higher productivity measured by
total factor productivity (TFP).
In addition, because the optimal configuration of a business's con-
trol system requires balancing the benefits of delegating decision
rights to lower managers against control losses from increased infor-
mation asymmetries, we hypothesize that the SASACs will adopt dif-
ferent strategies in managing SOEs in different industries. Our results
show that the beneficial effects are primarily observed in SOEs oper-
ating in competitive industries, where competition can act as a strong
disciplinary governance mechanism (Shleifer & Vishny, 1997) to lower
the agency costs of delegation. For monopolistic industries, however,
we do not observe any significant increase in decentralization,
performance-based payment, or productivity, presumably because
monopolistic SOEs derive much of the profit from their monopolistic
position and are not disciplined by competition. Thus, the benefits of
delegation are likely to be much smaller than the costs, and the
SASACs maintain tight control. Collectively, these results suggest that
SASACs are able to apply flexible approaches to oversee firms in dif-
ferent industries.
In our cross-sectional analyses, we study the heterogeneous
effect based on government quality. We define a high-quality gov-
ernment as a government that effectively protects property rights,
enforces fair contracts, applies laws and regulations to everyone,
and sufficiently refrains from expropriation (Levine, 2005). Accord-
ing to the administrative hierarchy, the central SASAC manages
central SOEs and is a subordinate division of the central govern-
ment. The local SASACs, which manage local SOEs, are subordinate
divisions of the local governments and also follow the leadership
of the central SASAC. We argue that high-quality local govern-
ments can refrain from expropriating and intervening in local
SASACs' management of the SOEs. Thus, high-quality governments
provide a better institutional foundation for local SASACs to super-
vise SOEs. Applying a widely used government quality index based
on survey responses of corporate executives from 120 major Chi-
nese cities (Chen, Li, Xiao, & Zou, 2014), we find that the effect of
SASACs is more pronounced in SOEs supervised by high-quality
governments. We interpret this result as evidence that, compared
with low-quality governments, high-quality governments can more
efficiently manage SOEs, presumably because they can more suc-
cessfully enforce policies and rules and apply more appropriate
administrative approaches that respect the difference between
competitive and monopolistic industries. Finally, we confirm that
our primary results are robust to a battery of analyses, including a
parallel trend test, a falsification test, applying two alternative sam-
ples and several key variable measurements, changing the industry
classifications of competitive versus monopolistic industries, and
including additional control variables and fixed effects at the
municipal level.
972
HU ET AL.
 14678683, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/corg.12514 by NYU Medical Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License