14450
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
Mixed-Ownership Reform and Innovation: An
Examination of State-Owned Enterprises
Haiping Fu
, Saixing Zeng
, Daxin Sun
, and Jiawei Lin
Abstract—Prior literature on ownership suggests that in the ma-
jority of cases, state ownership in state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
is not an optimal structure for ﬁrm performance, especially in
emerging economies. Mixed-ownership structures are designed to
overcome this disadvantage. However, their impacts on innovation
are not well understood. We examine whether and how SOEs’
innovation efforts beneﬁt from mixed-ownership reform, using a
sampleof375publiclylistedSOEsoperatinginChinabetween2003
and 2019. We discuss principal–principal and principal–agent con-
ﬂicts in SOEs and argue that the increase in managerial autonomy
that accompanies mixed-ownership reform releases SOEs from
state control and orients them toward engagement with market
forces, encouraging higher levels of innovation. Our results suggest
that both the frequency and the impact of innovation in SOEs
are improved by mixed-ownership reform. We further ﬁnd that
this relationship is more pronounced when SOEs are afﬁliated
with the central government, and it is strengthened through an
anticorruption policy. This study provides fresh insights into the
role of mixed-ownership reform in emerging economies.
Index Terms—Innovation, institutional transition, mixed-owner-
ship reform, state afﬁliation.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N EMERGING economies, infrastructure projects are in full
swing, accompanied by a series of engineering innovations
[1]. In the intricate tapestry of engineering construction, inno-
vation functions as the indispensable driving force [2]. State-
owned enterprises (SOEs) are the major vehicles in completing
engineering projects. Take China as an example: over the past ten
years, China, which is dubbed an “infrastructure-holic,” has pro-
duced great achievements in infrastructure construction and has
won many ﬁrsts in the ﬁeld of infrastructure construction, to the
point that it is now leading the world in engineering construction.
According to 2018 Global Best Projects Winners,1 published
Received 24 February 2023; revised 19 June 2023 and 7 September 2023;
accepted 29 August 2024. Date of publication 5 September 2024; date of
current version 18 September 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 72394370 and Grant
72401126 and in part by the Humanities and Social Sciences Research Project
of the Ministry of Education of China under Grant 23YJC630152. Review of
this article was arranged by Department Editor Y. Zhou. (Corresponding author:
Saixing Zeng.)
Haiping Fu, Saixing Zeng, and Jiawei Lin are with the Antai College
of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shang-
hai 200230, China (e-mail: haiping-fu@sjtu.edu.cn; zengsaixing@sjtu.edu.cn;
ljw1996@sjtu.edu.cn).
Daxin Sun is with the School of Management and Engineering, Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210093, China (e-mail: sundaxin@nju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TEM.2024.3454715
1[Online].
Available:
https://www.enr.com/blogs/13-critical-path/post/
44866-mind-bendingly-complex-efforts-rewarded-as-enr-2018-global-best-
projects-winners
by the magazine Engineering News-Record, four megaprojects
completedbyChineseSOEshavereceivedawards.Furthermore,
71.25% of the ﬁrms in the 2017 Top Chinese Contractors list,2
again published by the Engineering News-Record, were SOEs
and were responsible for most of the construction projects.
Facing great uncertainty and technological change in the ﬁeld of
engineering construction, governments in emerging economies,
such as those of China, India, and Brazil, are making signiﬁcant
efforts to improve their SOEs’ capabilities and especially their
capability for innovation [3], [4], [5], [6]. However, propo-
nents of agency theory, highlighting principal–principal (PP)
and principal–agent (PA) conﬂicts in SOEs, have argued that
unclear property rights and a lack of incentives often lead to
inefﬁciency in SOEs’ engineering practices, in terms of both
their proﬁtability and their technological innovation [7], [8], [9],
[10]. Those advisers, therefore, recommend full privatization of
SOEs to solve the PP and PA conﬂicts [7]. Other scholars support
partial privatization and believe that residual state ownership
is necessary because it gives ﬁrms access to scarce resources
and information about national policy aims, and it beneﬁts the
decision-making process [11], [12], [13]. In recent decades,
therefore, governments in emerging economies have conducted
widespread mixed-ownership reforms aimed at improving their
SOEs’ proﬁtability, adaptability, and capacity for innovation
[14]. The results have varied, and the relationship between such
reforms and innovation in SOEs’ engineering practices remains
unclear [12], [14], [15], [16].
In this study, we develop the theory of an extended agency
framework and test empirically whether and how mixed-
ownership reform encourages innovation in SOEs’ engineering
practices. Studies on innovation often take patents as an impor-
tant embodiment and achievement of innovation and research
and development (R&D) activities [17], [18]. In early studies,
scholars focused on the quantity of innovations and used the
patent count as the important index for innovation quantity
[19]. More recently, many studies have used patent citations to
evaluate patent quality, which again represents the inﬂuence of
innovations [20]. Following the literature, we, therefore, explore
two distinct ways in which innovation is manifest in organiza-
tions: innovation frequency (i.e., the quantity of innovations) and
impact (i.e., the inﬂuence of an innovation in its domain). Our
extended agency framework builds on the instrumental tradition
of agency theory to offer perspectives on both the PP and PA
2[Online].
Available:
https://www.enr.com/toplists/2017-Top-Chinese-
Contractors
1558-0040 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: New York University. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 14:30:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 

FU et al.: MIXED-OWNERSHIP REFORM AND INNOVATION
14451
TABLE I
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND CORRELATION MATRIX
relationships [7], [21]. Speciﬁcally, we analyze how and why
introducing nonstate ownership can mitigate the conﬂicts of both
PP and PA. Whereas SOEs are widely understood to be superior
to privately owned enterprises (POEs) in terms of innovation
frequency, they are also considered to be inferior to POEs in
terms of innovation impact [21], [22]. The present study seeks
to add to the current knowledge regarding the role of mixed-
ownership reform in SOEs’ innovation activities, by providing a
more nuanced understanding of the ownership changes involved
and the corresponding changes in the PP and PA relationships
that accompany such changes [21].
We furthermore contextualize our analysis by focusing on
China, where SOEs and engineering innovation are particularly
salient. To capture the character of SOEs’ innovation activities,
we employ the concepts of innovation frequency and innovation
impact, which refer, respectively, to the quantity and the quality
of innovation activities [18], [21], [22].
In this article, we argue that the typical effect of mixed-
ownership reform in SOEs is to reduce innovation frequency
while increasing innovation impact. We further investigate the
inﬂuence of institutional environment and institutional change.
Previous research has demonstrated how the institutional en-
vironment, and especially governmental priorities, can shape
the behavior of SOEs [23], [24]. In our study, we address
explicitly the different institutional environments of SOEs under
the control of the central government versus those under local
government control, and we examine the different priorities
that those environments give rise to during mixed-ownership
reform. We also examine the role of institutional change—in
the form of an anticorruption campaign—in mixed-ownership
reform. As we will discuss later, centrally governed SOEs assign
priority to key strategic sectors and national technological plans,
thereby counteracting the effect of mixed-ownership reform
[25], whereas local SOEs focus on commercial proﬁt, thus
enhancing the effect of mixed-ownership reform. An anticorrup-
tion campaign effectively addresses the problems of bribery and
embezzlement that tend to afﬂict SOEs, and thus, it contributes
to both the frequency and the impact of their innovations.
This article contributes to the literature in two respects. First,
prior studies have regarded the SOE as an unchanging institu-
tional environment in which the government plays a dominant
role externally and managers behave like politicians internally
[5]. By exploring the effects of mixed-ownership reform and its
institutional context, we reveal how institutional change does
occur within SOEs. During the reform process, the government
actively relinquishes its dominant position and introduces non-
state shareholders, who in turn force the SOEs to adapt to the
market economy and transform them into pioneering dynamos
of engineering innovation.
Wealsocontributetotheliteratureontheinstitutionalenviron-
mentofSOEs,includinginregardtotheeffectsofstateafﬁliation
and an anticorruption policy. Previous research focused on the
arm’s-length role of state afﬁliation, as exercised in actions
such as the nomination of external board members and advisors
[26]. We further prove that central and local governments have
differing priorities when they are carrying out mixed-ownership
reform. Central governments transform their SOEs into pio-
neering vehicles for technological innovation in engineering
construction, while local governments remold their SOEs into
enterprises that are geared toward proﬁtability [27]. In exploring
the puriﬁcatory effect of an anticorruption policy on SOEs, we
further reveal the liability of SOEs in mixed-ownership reform
and, thus, the key contingencies that are related to the asso-
ciations among an anticorruption campaign, mixed-ownership
reform, and innovation efﬁciency in an emerging market.
Second, we contribute to the literature on state ownership.
Prior scholars of agency theory have focused on the inher-
ent ﬂaws of state ownership, arguing that state ownership in
emerging economies leads to both the PP and PA conﬂicts [5],
[28] and suggesting full privatization as the optimal solution
[8]. In this article, we argue that mixed-ownership reform, or
partial privatization, should be preferred, and we present an
empirical examination of the effects of mixed-ownership reform
on SOEs’ engineering innovation. We also offer a framework
of PP and PA relationships to use in interpreting the effects of
mixed-ownership reform on SOEs’ innovations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: New York University. Downloaded on August 14,2026 at 14:30:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.