Social Science Studies Vol. 2 No. 1 2022 Page 015 – 029 
DOI: 10.47153/sss21.2342022 
*Corresponding Author 
Email address: cahyapurnama.uwm@gmail.com 
 
State Ownership: A Literature Review 
Cahya Purnama Asri 
Entrepreneurship Study Program, Faculty of Economic, Universitas Widya Mataram 
ARTICLE INFO 
ABSTRACT 
 
State ownership enterprises (SOEs) are always been considered to be less efficient, 
both in productivity and innovation. SOEs are more likely to do nothing and to 
maintain the existing advantages due to agency problems The objective of this 
research is to provide the review of the literature which is exhaustive, especially 
about state ownership. We presented a literature study and included 14 articles as 
a result. The result shows some variables that affected by state ownership, and a 
variable that affect state ownership. Further research is suggested to further 
explore the variables that affect state ownership. 
ISSN: 2798-2688 
Keywords: 
state ownership; 
literature review 
Introduction 
Emerging market enterprises (EMEs)‟s technological capabilities have significantly 
improved in recent years and relying on technological innovation to compete in the 
global marketplace are increasingly (Wu et al., 2016; J. Yi et al., 2013). Studies of 
internationalization strategy of emerging market multinational corporations 
(EMNCs) have found that Internationalization speed of EMNCs is faster than their 
competitors in developed countries (Deng, 2012; Jain et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2020; 
Mathews, 2006). Rapid internationalization can have positive or negative impact on 
performance (Chetty et al., 2014), and the conclusions of existing empirical studies 
also show that there is a complex relationship between internationalization speed 
and 
MNCs‟ 
performance 
(Mohr 
& 
Batsakis, 
2017; 
Powell, 
2014). 
The 
internationalization of an enterprise is a gradual process consisting of a series of 
stages (C. Yi et al., 2021). In this process, the enterprise gradually increases its 
resource investment in the overseas market in order to acquire and utilize the 
knowledge of overseas markets (Johanson & Vahlne, 1977). In the process of 
internationalization, whether an enterprise can effectively manage the specific 
knowledge of decentralized locations is the key to the successful implementation of 
the internationalization strategy and generally, EMNCs in emerging economies have 
insufficient managerial resources and face severe managerial constraints, therefore 
how internationalization speed affects subsidiary survival is an important question 

16 | 
 
P a g e
 
for them (C. Yi et al., 2021). The divergence of research conclusions on the 
relationship between internationalization speed and corporate performance has led 
scholars to study the moderating factors in the relationship (Jain et al., 2019). 
State ownership enterprises (SOEs) are always been considered to be less efficient, 
both in productivity and innovation (Zhang et al., 2019). SOEs are more likely to do 
nothing and to maintain the existing advantages due to agency problems (D‟Souza & 
Nash, 2017), policy burdens and soft-budget constraints (Lin & Tan, 1999; Megginson 
et al., 2014). Managers in SOEs lack professional management skills because they are 
often appointed by administration (Gan et al., 2018). In addition, policy burden is one 
major reason why SOEs do not have sufficient autonomy and flexibility (Xu, 2011). 
Although China‟s State-sector Reform has begun since 1978, it is considered a top 
priority of the government now which is a new addition to privatization programs 
over the past three decades (Megginson, 2017) and technology conglomerates 
produce more patents that are novel and/or with greater impact (K. Li et al., 2019). 
Literature Review 
It is well acknowledged that institutional context–defined as the environment that 
comprises social forms of the economic and political system, created and also used 
by various actors in a society (Fligstein, 2001; Turner, 2006). Institution theory 
suggests that a firm's strategy and behavior is the result of, or response to, a 
particular institutional context in which a firm is embedded (Alvi, 2012; Scott, 1995). 
Institutional context influences innovation by defining opportunities, by reducing the 
unknown, and by increasing or decreasing costs of economic exchanges (North, 
1990). 
Institutional context has three key dimensions, regulative, normative, and 
cognitive rules (Scott, 1995). While the role of these three types of institutions is often 
empirically indistinguishable (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983), it is important to focus on 
key institutional dimensions which influence the phenomena under study (Kostova 
& Roth, 2002). State ownership influences innovation in two important ways, first, 
government as a shareholder of SOEs exerts various institutional pressures on firms 
that can influence the incentives and ability of firms to develop innovation and 
second, state ownership also affects firms‟ ability to appropriate value from 
innovation (J. Yi et al., 2020). Although intellectual property rights (IPR) protection is 
a critical element of the regulatory environment for innovation (Bouet, 2015; Zobel et 
al., 2017), its enforcement in emerging markets is weak and often depends on the 
status of the firm (S. Li et al., 2004). State ownership may protect the firm in cases 
where IPR laws are weakly enforced (J. Yi et al., 2020). Because governments can