Vol:.(1234567890)
Chinese Political Science Review (2019) 4:28–51
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41111-018-0112-4
1 3
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Chinese State‑Owned Companies, Misallocation 
and the Reform Policy
Jianzhi Zhao1
Received: 17 June 2018 / Accepted: 20 August 2018 / Published online: 24 August 2018 
© Fudan University and Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
Abstract
This paper attempts to quantify the resource misallocation arising from firm own-
ership and to evaluate the SOE reform policy in China. State-owned enterprises 
(SOEs) in China typically enjoy preferred policies such as better access to financial 
system, reflecting the connections between these firms and various levels of gov-
ernment. This, however, leads to potential important distortions, with implications 
for resource allocation, productivity, and thus long-term growth. The SOE reform 
policy that seeks to “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small” could further exacerbate 
the distortions. By investigating a large firm-level data set with the methodology 
of Foster et al. (Am Econ Rev 98(1): 394–425, 2008) and Olley and Pakes (Econo-
metrica 64(6):1263–1297, 1996), we show that SOEs are significantly less likely to 
have efficient resource allocation than firms not controlled by the various levels of 
China’s government. Industries with dominant state-owned firms likewise have less 
efficiency, suggesting the impact China’s SOE policy that has especially favored the 
largest of the state-owned firms. The results have important policy implications in 
suggesting that reforms that allow for greater market forces among firms would lead 
to potential economic growth in China.
Keywords  State-owned companies · Misallocation · SOE reform policy
JEL Classification  H79 · G31 · L38
I am grateful to Peter Reuter, Takeo Hoshi, Albert “Pete” Kyle, Anton Korinek, Vojislav 
Maksimovic, Susan Schwab and participants of the University of Maryland Tuesday Policy Forum 
and The US Congressional Budget Office (CBO) for their helpful comments. All errors are ours.
 * Jianzhi Zhao 
 
jianzhizhao@fudan.edu.cn
1 
School of International Relations and Public Affairs, Fudan University, Handan Road 220, 
Yangpu, Shanghai 200433, China

29
1 3
Chinese Political Science Review (2019) 4:28–51 
1  Introduction
The main driver of China’s spectacular economic growth over the past 30 years 
has been the reallocation of labor and capital from a planned economy consisting 
of mainly state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to a somewhat market-oriented econ-
omy with booming private manufacturing firms that have achieved huge produc-
tivity gains (Song et al. 2011). However, this process is still far from finished. 
The heterogeneity between domestic private firms and SOEs is still marked in 
many dimensions. For instance, an important such difference is in terms of access 
to credit, where SOEs typically have access to financing at favorable terms com-
pared to privately owned companies. This situation reflects the incomplete state 
of reform of both the industrial sector and the Chinese financial system, which 
potentially lead to resource allocation.
A large body of the literature emphasizes the importance of resource alloca-
tion to economic growth. The hypothesis that the misallocation of resources such 
as land, entrepreneurship, labor, or capital accounts for a significant difference in 
economic performance between rich and poor countries has been supported by 
much research (Banerjee and Moll 2010; Banerjee and Duflo 2005; Hsieh and 
Klenow 2009; Bartelsman et al. 2013; Alfaro et al. 2008). Policy measures that 
allow resources to be reallocated from low productivity firms to high productivity 
ones would contribute to stronger economic growth.
Reforms are taking place in China’s economy. China introduced a program 
for SOE reform in 1996, focused on actions following the rubric of “Grasp the 
Large, Let Go of the Small”. Under this approach, the state would maintain its 
ownership of, and support for, giant SOEs with dominant market positions in 
their industries, while smaller or less successful state-owned firms would grad-
ually be made to face private competition and even eventually be sold off into 
private ownership such as with a management-led buyout. For the first category 
of firms, however, large SOEs could well enjoy phenomenal profitability, while 
private competition is effectively squelched by, for example, the relatively disad-
vantageous access to financing. Therefore, if large SOEs turn out to be less effi-
cient than their private counterparts, reforms that allow for competition and for 
resources to be reallocated to the private sector could have meaningful positive 
implications for productivity and growth. As such, this paper assesses the extent 
to which the misallocation of resources enjoyed by state-owned firms translates 
into slower productivity growth. If this is the case, then further liberalization that 
moves the Chinese industrial sector to be driven by market incentives could have 
immense potential to generate continued income gains.
While researchers have reached a consensus on the importance of resource mis-
allocation for productivity and economic growth, there are differences in reason-
ing for the channel by which resource misallocation affects productivity growth. 
The focus of research has been on the underlying cause for different track records 
among similar and different types of firms (formally, one could say that there are 
heterogeneous production functions among firms). Perhaps, the largest body of 
the literature attributes production shortcomings to the misallocation of resources