Administrative Science Quarterly
2017, Vol. 62(2)375–404
 The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/
journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0001839216674457
journals.sagepub.com/home/asq
State Ownership and
Firm Innovation in
China: An Integrated
View of Institutional
and Efficiency Logics
Kevin Zheng Zhou,1 Gerald Yong Gao,2 and
Hongxin Zhao3
Abstract
Using two longitudinal panel datasets of Chinese manufacturing firms, we
assess whether state ownership benefits or impedes firms’ innovation. We
show that state ownership in an emerging economy enables a firm to obtain
crucial R&D resources but makes the firm less efficient in using those
resources to generate innovation, and we find that a minority state ownership
is an optimal structure for innovation development in this context. Moreover,
the inefficiency of state ownership in transforming R&D input into innovation
output decreases when industrial competition is high, as well as for start-up
firms. Our findings integrate the efficiency logic (agency theory), which views
state ownership as detrimental to innovation, and institutional logic, which
notes that governments in emerging economies have critical influences on reg-
ulatory policies and control over scarce resources. We discuss the implications
of these findings for research on state ownership and firm innovation in emer-
ging economies.
Keywords: state ownership, innovation, agency theory, institutional theory,
industrial competition, state start-up, emerging economies, Chinese
manufacturing
Innovation is a key driver of sustainable competitive advantage and economic
growth, and the rise of emerging economies has fueled a growing interest in
how factors unique to those markets affect innovation development (Chen
et al., 2014; Lee, O¨ zsomer, and Zhou, 2015). Because governments in emer-
ging economies such as Brazil, China, and Russia play critical roles in affecting
firms’ behavior, researchers have recently revisited state capitalism, focusing
on whether government control may stimulate innovation and competitive
1 Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong
2 College of Business Administration, University of Missouri–St. Louis
3 John Cook School of Business, Saint Louis University

advantage (Lazzarini, 2015; Mazzucato, 2015) and how various forms of state
ownership foster firms’ performance (Inoue, Lazzarini, and Musacchio, 2013;
Musacchio, Lazzarini, and Aguilera, 2015). But how different levels of state
ownership affect firms’ innovation has received less attention (Musacchio,
Lazzarini, and Aguilera, 2015).
According to the conventional, efficiency-based economic view, mostly
rooted in agency theory, state ownership plays a minor role in spurring firms’
innovation and performance. Because state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are gov-
erned by administrative rather than economic imperatives, government inter-
vention is unavoidable, and political tasks hinder firms’ development (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1994; Shleifer, 1998; Ramaswamy, 2001). Managers in SOEs often
lack incentives to pursue market-driven, efficiency-based innovative activities
and instead just fulfill their administrative mandates (Ramamurti, 2000; Freund,
2001). According to this view, SOEs should gradually lose their innovativeness
and competitiveness over time.
In reality, however, many SOEs in emerging economies have evolved into
dynamic dynamos, rather than the predicted dying dinosaurs (Ralston et al.,
2006; Musacchio and Lazzarini, 2014; Stan, Peng, and Bruton, 2014). China
now has 106 companies in the 2015 Fortune Global 500—four times more than
in 2006—about two-thirds of which are SOEs. An institutional perspective
helps to explain this growth. According to the institutional view (North, 2005;
Peng, Wang, and Jiang, 2008), governments are among the most salient insti-
tutions in emerging economies, with critical influences on regulatory policies
and control over scarce resources, so they profoundly shape firms’ competitive
environment (Gao et al., 2010; Nee and Opper, 2012). Because SOEs have
access to policy information, government support, and valuable resources
(Chen et al., 2014; Musacchio and Lazzarini, 2014), these advantages presum-
ably could foster innovation.
Whereas prior studies generally show that SOEs perform worse than their
private counterparts (see Megginson and Netter, 2001, for a review), empirical
evidence is mixed on the effects of state ownership on innovation. Some stud-
ies report that state ownership has negative effects on new product sales, pat-
ent applications, firms’ adoption of product innovation, and revenue from
innovation projects in China (Jefferson et al., 2003; Xu and Zhang, 2008; Guan
et al., 2009), and Ayyagari, Demirgu¨c-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2011) showed
that SOEs are less innovative than private firms across 47 emerging markets.
In contrast, other studies have shown that SOEs produce more patent registra-
tions or new products than non-SOEs in China (Li and Xia, 2008; Choi, Lee, and
Williams, 2011). Meanwhile, Choi, Park and Hong (2012) found that state own-
ership has no significant bearing on Korean firms’ technological innovation
performance.
To resolve the theoretical and empirical inconsistencies about the effects of
state ownership, we theorize in this paper that the institutional and efficiency
logics pertain to different facets of state ownership: the institutional logic
focuses on resource allocation, and the efficiency logic refers to resource utili-
zation, so they are intertwined in explaining the impact of state ownership on
innovation. Whereas state ownership could enable a firm to obtain more
resources for innovation (i.e., more R&D input), it may also decrease the firm’s
ability to convert its R&D input into innovation output (i.e., to have lower
376
Administrative Science Quarterly 62 (2017)