International Review of Economics and Finance 76 (2021) 767–780
Available online 28 July 2021
1059-0560/© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Does public money drive out private? Evidence from government 
regulations of industrial overcapacity governance in urban China 
Bo Cheng a, Tom Christensen b,c, Liang Ma c,*, Junli Yu d,* 
a School of Accountancy, Nanjing Audit University, Jiangsu, China 
b Department of Political Science, University of Oslo, Norway 
c School of Public Administration and Policy, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 
d China Institute for Urban Governance/School of International and Public Affairs, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 
A R T I C L E I N F O 
Keywords: 
Industrial overcapacity 
Policy implementation 
Regulation 
Ownership 
Urban governance 
A B S T R A C T 
Governments are required to be fair in regulating market players, but their behaviors are often 
distorted by political connections with firms. In this study, we use the natural experiment of 
overcapacity reduction in China’s industrial firms to examine to what extent their ownership 
matters in regulatory stringency. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) were significantly less likely 
than private firms to reduce their overcapacity. Furthermore, SOEs with more personnel redun­
dancy and less degree of diversification in more competitive industries were less likely to meet 
central mandates. These results suggest that selective policy implementation helps to meet policy 
purposes albeit with unintended consequences. 
1. Introduction 
Governments are required to be fair in regulating market players, whether public or private firms, but their behaviors are often 
distorted by political connections with firms (Fisman, 2001). State-owned enterprises (SOEs) often have strong institutional con­
nections with the government, and they are usually subject to more lenient regulations than private firms (Konisky & Teodoro, 2016). 
It is thus interesting to examine how and why SOEs are regulated differently from other firms, and China is a very relevant context for 
such a study. 
Prior studies have documented the fact that SOEs and other firms are treated differently by governments and their allies (e.g., 
banks). For instance, political connected firms are more likely to access to financial resources and interest rates are often cheaper 
(Claessens et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008). SOEs are less likely to be detected and punished in environmental pollution (Konisky & 
Teodoro, 2016). It is also found that SOEs are more likely to comply with government mandates in reducing energy consumption 
(Liang & Ma, 2020; Ma & Liang, 2018). 
This article relates to this strand of literature in two ways. First, we use the 2015 natural experiment of overcapacity reduction in 
China’s industrial firms, decided by the central government, to examine to what extent the ownership matters in regulatory stringency. 
The reduction of industrial overcapacity is an ideal context to examine the differentiation of government regulations between SOEs and 
other firms, because governments are ambivalent in policy implementation. But, since the government has multiple goals on different 
levels, the regulation may hurt other goals, like social stability maintenance, which are more politically salient than economic growth 
* Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: bondcheng@vip.sina.com (B. Cheng), tom.christensen@stv.uio.no (T. Christensen), liangma@ruc.edu.cn (L. Ma), jlyuchina@ 
sjtu.edu.cn (J. Yu). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Review of Economics and Finance 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/iref 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iref.2021.07.012 
Received 9 November 2020; Received in revised form 28 May 2021; Accepted 19 July 2021 

International Review of Economics and Finance 76 (2021) 767–780
768
and green development, the core goals of overcapacity reduction. The use of experimental design by difference-in-differences (DID) 
helps to address estimation limitations in prior studies which mainly employ regression models and are prone to endogeneity concerns. 
Second, we not only estimate the effects of firm ownership, but also report nuanced mechanisms through which government regu­
lations are relaxed among SOEs. 
Accordingly, our research questions are the following: 
• To what extent does ownership matters in the central government’s regulation of overcapacity, i.e., are SOEs favored in this 
respect? 
• What are the mechanisms through which this favoritism eventually happens? How are personnel redundancy, market competi­
tiveness, and the degree of diversification important for meeting central mandates? 
The main results show that Chinese SOEs were less likely than private firms to reduce their overcapacity. Furthermore, SOEs with 
more personnel redundancy and less degree of diversification in more competitive industries were less likely to meet central mandates, 
indicating the underlying motives driving governments’ leniency towards SOEs. It is discussed whether this suggests that selective 
policy implementation helps to meet policy purposes albeit with unintended consequences, exacerbated the lingering state-private 
divide in regulatory fairness. 
In the rest of this paper, we first introduce the context of industrial overcapacity reduction in China, followed by theoretical review 
and hypotheses. We then report the data and methods used in this study, and report the main empirical findings. We lastly discuss the 
theoretical and policy implications of our findings, and conclude with future research avenues. 
2. The context of industrial overcapacity in China 
China has witnessed two-digit economic growth over the past four decades since the reform and opening-up in 1978, but its 
economic structure is chronically imbalanced and unsustainable due to at least two reasons. First, economic growth is mainly boosted 
by domestic and foreign investments, particularly fixed-assets investments dominated by governments. Investment-driven economic 
growth is relatively isolated from domestic consumption and prone to environmental turbulence. To buffer the impact of 2008 global 
financial crisis, for instance, the central government invested four trillions Yuan (almost 590 billion USD) to stabilize national 
economy, but over-investment resulted in overcapacity in many industries (Chen et al., 2020). In China’s steel, coal, electric power, 
and other industries characterized by high energy intensity and heavy pollution, there have been significant overcapacity. For 
instance, almost all provinces have increasing risk of overcapacity in coal power (Feng et al., 2018). 
Second, local protectionism of economic growth is a chronic challenge for the central government despite China adopts a 
centralized unitary system, reflecting tensions between levels in their balance of different concerns. Local governments are keen on 
protecting their firms by non-market interventions, which is running counter to the Western model of independent SOEs that China 
promised to follow when it became a member of WTO in 2001. Local firms usually receive subsidies and other preferential policies to 
compete with firms from other jurisdictions, which often encounter local entry barriers and other government obstructions (Wedeman, 
2003). A recent study shows that government subsidies may intensify the overcapacity risk of wind and solar energy companies (Zhang 
et al., 2016). Another analysis finds that zombie firms crowd out healthy enterprises and exacerbate overcapacity (Shen & Chen, 2017). 
A game model reveals that local governments are “behind-the-scenes” controllers of coal overcapacity, and market mechanisms and 
central supervision help to alleviate local impulse in redundant fixed-asset investment and protection of coal enterprises (Zhang et al., 
2017). 
To reduce industrial overcapacity, the central government mandatorily required local governments and targeted firms to imple­
ment the de-capacity policy, which runs counter to the interests of local governments. By squeezing the approval of firm registration, 
land use, finance access, and other channels, as well as promoting merger and acquisition among industrial enterprises, the central 
government aimed to cut overcapacity. Such efforts in the 1998–2001 and 2003–2006 periods are fruitless due to local resistance and 
reversal policies, and in December 2015 a new de-capacity policy was initiated by the central government. The implementation of the 
de-capacity policy is even more urgent albeit painful for local governments than before because economic growth has been declining in 
recent decade. Meanwhile, public grievances against environmental pollution have been intensifying, and local governments have to 
more seriously alleviate industrial pollution. 
Excess capacity or overcapacity refers to the fact that industrial capacity excesses market demand (Dagdeviren, 2016). Over­
capacity means that firms’ outputs are lower than the optimum and cannot produce with the lowest cost (Chamberlin, 1933). Prior 
studies primarily examine the antecedents and mechanisms of overcapacity (Aghion et al., 2015; Arestis & Sawyer, 2005; Blonigen & 
Wilson, 2010), as well as how to attenuate overcapacity (Belke et al., 2015). 
In this study, we use the 2015 de-capacity policy to examine to what extent industrial firms comply with central mandates. We are 
particularly interested in the different responses of SOEs and other firms, as well as the varying effects of firm attributes. 
3. Theoretical hypotheses 
3.1. Why do local governments protect SOEs? 
Governments as public organizations often pursue multiple and sometimes ambiguous and conflicting goals, and they have to 
balance across different goals (Rainey, 2014), which in our study is reflected in different priorities of central and local governments 
B. Cheng et al.