OWNERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE IN 
COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENTS: 
A COMPARISON OF THE PERFORMANCE 
OF PRIVATE, MIXED, 
AND STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES* 
ANTHONY E. BOARDMAN 
and 
AIDAN R. VINING 
University of British Columbia 
Simon Fraser University 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
THE property rights theory of the firm suggests that public enterprises 
should perform less efficiently and less profitably than private enterprises. 
However, the existing empirical evidence actually provides weak support 
for this hypothesis. Most of the evidence is based upon North American 
"firms" and has compared the performance of matched public and private 
firms where at least one of the following limitations applies: (1) firms have 
a natural (spatial) monopoly (namely, electric and water utilities, nonrail 
transit, fire services, and refuse collection); (2) there is a regulated duop- 
oly (for example, airlines, railroads, nonrail transit, financial institutions); 
or (3) output is not or cannot be priced by competitive forces (this applies 
to all of the above plus health-related services). Almost no empirical 
research has tested the effect of ownership in a competitive environment. 
In fact, with the exception of two studies that examine Indonesia and 
Tanzania,' no study has explicitly compared the effect of ownership while 
controlling for relevant factors. 
* Earlier drafts of this article were presented at the Symposium on Industrial Policy in the 
European Economic Community and Spain, in Barcelona, June 1987, and at the Association 
for Public Policy Analysis and Management, Austin, Texas, November 1986. This research 
was supported by grants from the Centre of International Business Studies (University of 
British Columbia), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (Canada). We 
thank Yuming Fu, David Ing, and Karl Wong for research assistance. 
1 See Richard Funkhouser & Paul W. MacAvoy, A Sample of Observations on Compara- 
tive Prices in Public and Private Enterprises, 11 J. Pub. Econ. 353 (1979); and Kwan S. Kim, 
[Journal of Law & Economics, vol. XXXII (April 1989)] 
? 1989 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-2186/89/3201-0002$01.50 
I 

THE JOURNAL OF LAW AND ECONOMICS 
The most convincing test of the property rights theory would be based 
on a comparison of industrial state-owned enterprises (SOEs), mixed en- 
terprises (MEs),2 and private corporations (PCs) in competitive environ- 
ments. To address this issue we compare the performance of PCs, SOEs, 
and MEs among the 500 largest non-U.S. industrial firms. Of these 500 
corporations, 419 are PCs, 58 are SOEs, and 23 are MEs. Results of this 
analysis are by no means of purely theoretical interest. Large industrial 
public corporations play a major role in the economies of many countries 
around the world.3 
Section II reviews both the economic theory and the empirical evidence 
on the performance of public, private, and mixed enterprises. Section III 
discusses the problem of evaluating the performance of SOEs and MEs 
given the existence of sociopolitical goals. Section IV presents the model 
and the data. Section V discusses the estimation methodology and the 
empirical results. Section VI presents brief conclusions. 
II. 
THEORY AND EVIDENCE ON PUBLIC, PRIVATE, 
AND MIXED CORPORATIONS 
A. 
Theoretical Framework 
The dominant positive model of the effect of ownership is the public 
choice, or property rights, model. Alchian suggested that property rights 
are more attenuated in the public corporation than in the private corpora- 
Enterprise Performance in the Public and Private Sectors: Tanzanian Experience, 1970-75, 
15 J. Develop. Areas 471 (1981). 
2 When one deals with data on corporations based outside the U.S. it is inadequate to 
classify corporations as public or private because some of them are mixed, that is, part of 
their stock is in private hands and part of it is in public hands. For a survey of recent 
research pertaining specifically to mixed enterprises, see Anthony Boardman, Catherine 
Eckel, & Aidan Vining, The Advantages and Disadvantages of Mixed Enterprises, in Multi- 
national Corporations and State-Owned Enterprises: A New Challenge in International 
Business (Research in International Business and International Relations, Vol. I) 221 (Anant 
R. Negandhi, Howard Thomas, & K. L. K. Rao eds. 1986). 
3 For example, speaking of Europe, R. Joseph Monsen & Kenneth D. Walters, 
Nationalized Companies: A Threat to American Business 1 (1983), note: "As recently as 
1970 not a single manufacturing industry in which state-owned firms held an important share 
of industrial output could be found in Western Europe. That has now changed radically. In a 
number of industries, state-owned firms have gained a dominant, or significant, position in 
European markets. The list includes some of the most important industrial sectors, including 
aerospace, steel, aluminum, shipbuilding, and automobiles. 
"Today state-owned firms can be found in virtually all industries in Europe. New state 
firms in the 1970's were created or nationalized in pharmaceuticals, electronics, computers, 
office equipment, oil, microelectronics, chemicals, petrochemicals, pulp and paper, and 
telecommunications. Each year more firms are drawn into the state-owned sector." 
2