Policy Research Working Paper
10262
Are All State-Owned Enterprises Equal?
A Taxonomy of Economic Activities to Assess SOE 
Presence in the Economy
Andrea Dall’Olio
Tanja Goodwin
Martha Martinez Licetti
Ana Cristina Alonso Soria
Maciej Drozd
Jan Orlowski
Fausto Patiño Peña
Dennis Sanchez-Navarro
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice 
December 2022 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Produced by the Research Support Team
Abstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Policy Research Working Paper 10262
This paper proposes a sector taxonomy of the rationale for 
the presence of state-owned enterprises in specific industries. 
The taxonomy is conceptualized only on an efficiency-based 
rationale for state participation in different economic activ­
ities, abstracting it from social or political justification of 
state-owned enterprises, which can be subjective or condi­
tioned to the country context. The taxonomy is leveraged 
on a standard industry classification, the Nomenclature 
of Economic Activities Revision 2 four-digit level sector 
classification, which is sufficiently disaggregated to resemble 
specific markets, and thus more appropriate for analyzing 
the presence of state-owned enterprises through the lens of 
industrial organization. The proposed taxonomy deploys a 
decision tree, based on efficiency-based criteria, to classify 
563 disaggregated sectors into one of three groups: a “com­
petitive” category, for which the presence of state-owned 
enterprises does not appear to be justified on grounds of 
economic efficiency/market failure; a “natural monopoly” 
category, which includes economic sectors whose market 
structure is characterized by economies of scale and subad­
ditivity costs that could be corrected via the participation 
of state-owned enterprises; and a “partially contestable” 
category, which includes economic sectors characterized 
by some form of market power, externalities, or other 
market failures that could be addressed through state own­
ership. The application of the decision tree classifies 11 
disaggregated sectors as natural monopolies, 45 as partially 
contestable, and the remaining 505 as competitive.
This paper is a product of the Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice. It is part of a larger effort by the 
World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the 
world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://www.worldbank.org/prwp. The authors may be 
contacted at adallolio@worldbank.org, tgoodwin@worldbank.org, mlicetti@worldbank.org, aalonsosoria@worldbank.org, 
mdrozd@worldbank.org, jan.orlowski@aiib.org, fpatinopena@worldbank.org, and dsancheznavarro@worldbank.org.