The Performance Differential between Private and
State Owned Enterprises: The Roles of Ownership,
Management and Market Structure
Eskil Goldeng, Leo A. Grünfeld and Gabriel R. G. Benito
BI Norwegian School of Management; MENON Business Economics; BI Norwegian School of Management
abstract
This article examines differences in performance between private companies
(POEs) and state owned enterprises (SOEs), with an emphasis on the effects of market
structure. The study uses a comprehensive panel covering in principle all registered companies
during the 1990s in Norway, a country where SOEs play an important role in regular markets.
Return on assets as well as costs relative to sales revenue are used as measures of performance
in markets where SOEs and POEs compete with each other. Overall, POEs perform
signiﬁcantly better than SOEs. The study tests the hypothesis that SOE managers may learn
from POE managers in environments with stronger competition, but ﬁnds only weak empirical
support for such a learning mechanism.
INTRODUCTION
Even though the dominant type of ownership in market-based societies is private own-
ership, cases of state ownership are easy to ﬁnd. In the Scandinavian welfare economies,
the presence of state owned companies in regular markets is particularly strong. Yet,
active and deliberate liberalization and privatization policies, especially during the last
two decades, have led to a considerable reduction in the number of state owned enter-
prises (SOEs) in most countries (Sheshinski and López-Calva, 2003; see also Buck et al.,
1998; Cuevas Rodríguez et al., 2007; Djankov and Murrell, 2002; Uhlenbruck and
De Castro, 1998 for discussions of corporate governance issues related to the implemen-
tation of privatization schemes), but many companies remain state owned. There has
been a long-standing debate on the merits – and problems – of government control over
business enterprises (Kay and Thompson, 1986; Megginson and Netter, 2001; Nombela,
2001). State ownership has been defended on the grounds of various types of market
failure, and it has been regarded as an instrument for the attainment of non-economic
goals such as the need for public control over natural resources, regional policies,
employment or social issues etc (Grout and Stevens, 2003). The contrasting views are
Address for reprints: Gabriel R. G. Benito, BI Norwegian School of Management, Nydalsveien 37, N-0442
Oslo, Norway (gabriel.r.g.benito@bi.no).
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
Journal of Management Studies 45:7 November 2008
0022-2380

that state ownership is mainly used for ideological reasons, that it suits the interests of a
ruling elite, or that it simply is retained due to institutional inertia. Also, if state ownership
does increase the scope for deviations from proﬁt-maximizing behaviour, the economic
performance of SOEs is likely to suffer when compared to private companies (POEs)
(Andrews and Dowling, 1998; Boycko et al., 1996; Djankov and Murrell, 2002).
Independent of one’s particular point of view on the issue of state ownership versus
private ownership, most scholars agree that a core question in the privatization debate
is whether type of ownership has an effect on the performance of companies. Recent
research on corporate governance suggests that ownership issues, such as the concen-
tration and identity of owners, affect the performance of companies ( Januszewski et al.,
2002; Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Thomsen and Pedersen, 2000). In this article, we focus
on ownership identity. If certain ownership types consistently show superior economic
performance relative to others, it seems reasonable to expect a move away from existing
ownership arrangements towards the most efﬁcient ones.
An agency theory perspective on state versus private ownership suggests that eco-
nomic performance levels by and large are the result of the management incentives,
costs, and exposure to disciplinary (market) forces implied by the different ownership
structures. Traditional reasoning in industrial economics, however, suggests that ﬁrm
performance is a result of the level of competition in a given market and the strategies
followed by individual ﬁrms in that market. Whereas the former view proposes that
government owned companies should be expected to display inferior performance
because of inadequacies of that particular type of ownership, the latter view suggests
that performance differences, if any, can largely be explained by differences in market
structure.
We develop a model that allows us to test the effect of both ownership type and market
structure on ﬁrm performance. Furthermore, we explore whether the economic perfor-
mance of ﬁrms is driven by the interaction between type of ownership and the degree of
competition in the market. It is commonly believed that a more competitive environment
affects the management of ﬁrms. Managers will seek to improve the competitiveness
and performance of their ﬁrm, at least if they have incentives that are based on perfor-
mance (Cuervo and Villalonga, 2000; Villalonga, 2000). Such improvements can be
made through a stronger focus on innovation and cost control. Moreover, managers of
ﬁrms that experience strong competition also face a higher potential for learning from
their competitors (Barnett et al., 1994). This learning potential should be particularly
relevant for ﬁrms that have not attained the best practice and that operate under softer
budget constraints (Tan, 2002; Tan and Peng, 2003), allowing them to learn over time
without having to exit the market.
Because previous studies on privatization have not paid sufﬁcient attention to the
various determinants of economic performance, it has been unclear whether and to what
extent observed performance differences are driven by ownership or by market charac-
teristics.[1] In their seminal contribution to the study of privatization, Vickers and Yarrow
(1989, p. 39) give the following comment on the empirical literature: ‘. . . many studies
focus almost exclusively upon the ownership variable and fail to take proper account of
the effects on performance differences in market structure, regulation, and other relevant
economic factors’. Boardman and Vining (1989) conducted one of the ﬁrst systematic
Performance Differential
1245
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2008
 14676486, 2008, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2008.00790.x by NYU Medical Central Library, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License