The Park Place Economist 
The Park Place Economist 
Volume 25
Issue 1 
Article 8 
2017 
Performance in Strategic Sectors: A Comparison of Profitability 
Performance in Strategic Sectors: A Comparison of Profitability 
and Efficiency of State-Owned Enterprises and Private 
and Efficiency of State-Owned Enterprises and Private 
Corporations 
Corporations 
Brigitta Jakob 
Illinois Wesleyan University, bjakob@iwu.edu 
Recommended Citation 
Jakob, Brigitta (2017) "Performance in Strategic Sectors: A Comparison of 
Profitability and Efficiency of State-Owned Enterprises and Private Corporations," 
The Park Place Economist: Vol. 25 
Available at: https://digitalcommons.iwu.edu/parkplace/vol25/iss1/8 
Archived materials include content that was produced by or on behalf of IWU, as well as content 
that may relate to IWU but was not produced by, on behalf of, or with the consent of IWU. As a 
result, IWU provides this resource for informational purposes only, and the content of any 
particular material included in the archive does not necessarily represent the views, positions, 
policies, or procedures of IWU. 
This Article is protected by copyright and/or related rights. It has been brought to you by Digital 
Commons @ IWU with permission from the rights-holder(s). You are free to use this material in any 
way that is permitted by the copyright and related rights legislation that applies to your use. For 
other uses you need to obtain permission from the rights-holder(s) directly, unless additional rights 
are indicated by a Creative Commons license in the record and/ or on the work itself. This material 
has been accepted for inclusion by editorial board of the Park Place Economist at Illinois Wesleyan 
University. For more information, please contact digitalcommons@iwu.edu. 
©Copyright is owned by the author of this document. 
Please click here to request an accessible copy. 

Performance in Strategic Sectors: A Comparison of Profitability and Efficiency of 
Performance in Strategic Sectors: A Comparison of Profitability and Efficiency of 
State-Owned Enterprises and Private Corporations 
State-Owned Enterprises and Private Corporations 
Abstract 
Abstract 
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) are often claimed to be less profitable and less efficient compared to 
private corporations. According to Grout and Stevens (2003), SOEs were associated with different types 
of market failure and were mostly used to attain non-economic goals such as unemployment level 
reduction, control over natural resources, and political stability. Shirley and Walsh (2000), who surveyed 
52 studies on the difference in performance between SOEs and private corporations, discovered that 
there were only five studies indicating that SOEs outperformed private corporations. However, these 
studies only monitored the firms in the monopolistic utility sectors. Similar situations occurred in most of 
the previous studies that researched correlation between performance and firm ownership. Many of them 
either focused heavily on industries with monopoly/oligopoly characteristics or industries with output that 
could not be priced by competitive forces. As a result, it was difficult to distinguish the effects of market 
regulations and conditions on the types of firm ownership. Since there is a correlation between 
competition and performance, controlling for the market structure is crucial to the proper investigation of 
performance across different types of ownership (Goldeng, Grunfeld, & Benito, 2008). Since my research 
is focusing on the difference in performance between SOEs and private corporations within a competitive 
environment, it contributes to the very few studies that controlled for the market structure. My main 
research question is whether private corporations perform better compared to SOEs in terms of 
profitability and efficiency in the strategic sectors in a competitive environment. My hypothesis is that due 
to the soft-budget constraint behavior and policy burdens imposed by the state, SOEs are less efficient 
and have lower profitability compared to private corporations. 
This article is available in The Park Place Economist: https://digitalcommons.iwu.edu/parkplace/vol25/iss1/8